History of French - Wikipedia Jump to content From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Overview of the history of the French language This article is about the history and evolution of the French language . For the history of the French people, see French people . For the history of the French culture, see culture of France . This article needs more citations . Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed . Find sources: "History of French" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( February 2008 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on the French language Langues d'oïl Dialects Creoles Francophonie History Phonological history Oaths of Strasbourg Ordinance of Villers-Cotterêts Anglo-Norman Grammar Adverbs Articles and determiners Pronouns ( personal ) Verbs ( conjugation morphology passé composé passé simple ) Orthography Alphabet Reforms Circumflex Braille Phonology Elision Liaison Aspirated h Help:IPA/French v t e French is a Romance language (meaning that it is descended primarily from Vulgar Latin ) that specifically is classified under the Gallo-Romance languages . The discussion of the history of a language is typically divided into "external history", describing the ethnic, political, social, technological, and other changes that affected the languages, and "internal history", describing the phonological and grammatical changes undergone by the language itself. External social and political history [ edit ] Roman Gaul ( Gallia ) [ edit ] Before the Roman conquest of what is now France by Julius Caesar (58–52 BC), much of present France was inhabited by Celtic-speaking people referred to by the Romans as Gauls and Belgae . Southern France was also home to a number of other remnant linguistic and ethnic groups including Iberians along the eastern part of the Pyrenees and western Mediterranean coast, the remnant Ligures on the eastern Mediterranean coast and in the alpine areas, Greek colonials in places such as Marseille and Antibes , [ 1 ] and Vascones and Aquitani (Proto- Basques ) in much of the southwest. [ 2 ] [ 3 ] The Gaulish-speaking population is held to have continued speaking Gaulish even as considerable Romanisation of the local material culture occurred, with Gaulish and Latin coexisting for centuries under Roman rule and the last attestation of Gaulish to be deemed credible [ 4 ] having been written in the second half of the 6th century about the destruction of a pagan shrine in Auvergne . [ 5 ] The Celtic population of Gaul had spoken Gaulish , which is moderately well attested and appears to have wide dialectal variation including one distinctive variety, Lepontic . The French language evolved from Vulgar Latin (a Latinised popular Italic dialect called sermo vulgaris ), but it was strongly influenced by Gaulish in its grammar. [ 6 ] [ 7 ] Examples include sandhi phenomena ( liaison , resyllabification , lenition ), the loss of unstressed syllables and the vowel system (such as raising /u/ , /o/ → /y/ , /u/ , fronting stressed /a/ → /e/ , /ɔ/ → /ø/ or /œ/ ). [ 8 ] [ 9 ] Syntactic oddities attributable to Gaulish include the intensive prefix ro - ~ re - (cited in the Vienna glossary, 5th century) [ 10 ] (cf. luire "to glimmer" vs. reluire "to shine"; related to Irish ro - and Welsh rhy - "very"), emphatic structures, prepositional periphrastic phrases to render verbal aspect and the semantic development of oui "yes", aveugle "blind". Some sound changes are attested: /ps/ → /xs/ and /pt/ → /xt/ appears in a pottery inscription from la Graufesenque (1st century) in which the word para xs idi is written for paro ps ides . [ 11 ] Similarly, the development - cs - → /xs/ → /is/ and - ct - → /xt/ → /it/ , the latter being common to much of Western Romance languages , also appears in inscriptions: Divicta ~ Divixta , Rectugenus ~ Rextugenus ~ Reitugenus , and is present in Welsh, e.g. * seχtan → saith "seven", * eχtamos → eithaf "extreme". For Romance, compare: Latin fraxinus "ash (tree)" → OFr fraisne (mod. frêne ), Occitan fraisse , Catalan freixe , Portuguese freixo , Romansch fraissen (vs. Italian frassino , Romanian frasin , Spanish fresno ). Latin lactem "milk" → French lait , Welsh llaeth , Portuguese leite , Catalan llet , Piemontese lait , Liguro leite (vs. Italian latte , Occitan lach , Lombardo làcc , Romansch latg , Spanish leche ). Both changes sometimes had a cumulative effect in French: Latin capsa → * kaχsa → caisse (vs. Italian cassa , Spanish caja ) or captīvus → * kaχtivus → Occitan caitiu , OFr chaitif [ 12 ] (mod. chétif "wretched, feeble", cf. Welsh caeth "bondman, slave", vs. Italian cattivo , Spanish cautivo ). In French and the adjoining folk dialects and closely related languages, some 200 words of Gaulish origin have been retained, most of which pertaining to folk life. They include: land features ( bief "reach, mill race", combe "hollow", grève "sandy shore", lande "heath"); plant names ( berle "water parsnip", bouleau "birch", bourdaine "black alder", chêne "oak", corme "service berry", gerzeau "corncockle", if "yew", vélar/vellar "hedge mustard"); wildlife ( alouette "lark", barge " godwit ", loche " loach ", pinson "finch", vandoise " dace ", vanneau " lapwing "); rural and farm life, most notably: boue "mud", cervoise "ale", charrue "plow", glaise "loam", gord "kiddle, stake net", jachère "fallow field", javelle "sheaf, bundle, fagot", marne " marl ", mouton "sheep", raie "lynchet", sillon "furrow", souche "tree stump, tree base", tarière "auger, gimlet", tonne "barrel"; some common verbs ( braire "to bray", changer "to change", craindre "to fear", jaillir "to surge, gush").; [ 13 ] and loan translations: aveugle "blind", from Latin ab oculis "eyeless", calque of Gaulish exsops "blind", literally "eyeless" [ 14 ] [ 15 ] (vs. Latin caecus → OFr cieu , It. cieco , Sp. ciego , or orbus → Occ. òrb , Venetian orbo , Romanian orb ). Other Celtic words were not borrowed directly but brought in through Latin, some of which had become common in Latin, braies "knee-length pants", chainse "tunic", char "dray, wagon", daim "roe deer", étain "tin", glaive "broad sword", manteau "coat", vassal "serf, knave". Latin quickly took hold among the urban aristocracy for mercantile, official and educational reasons but did not prevail in the countryside until some four or five centuries later since Latin was of little or no social value to the landed gentry and peasantry. This eventual spread of Latin can be attributed to social factors in the Late Empire such as the movement from urban-focused power to village-centred economies and legal serfdom. Franks [ edit ] See also: Effect of substrate/superstrate languages In the 3rd century, Western Europe started to be invaded by Germanic tribes from the north and the east, and some of the groups settled in Gaul . In the history of the French language, the most important groups are the Franks in much of northern France, the Alemanni in the modern German/French border area ( Alsace ), the Burgundians in the Rhône (and the Saone ) Valley, the Suebi in the Spanish autonomous community of Galicia and Northern Portugal , the Vandals in Southern Andalusia , and the Visigoths in much of southern France as well as Spain . The Frankish language had a profound influence on the Latin spoken in their respective regions by altering both the pronunciation (especially the vowel system phonemes: e , eu , u , short o ) and the syntax . It also introduced a number of new words ( see List of French words of Germanic origin ). Sources disagree on how much of the vocabulary of modern French (excluding French dialects) comes from Germanic words and range from just 500 words (≈1%) [ 16 ] (representing loans from ancient Germanic languages: Gothic and Frankish) [ 17 ] to 15% of the modern vocabulary (representing all Germanic loans up to modern times: Gothic, Frankish, Old Norse /Scandinavian, Dutch, German and English) [ 18 ] to even higher if Germanic words coming from Latin and other Romance languages are taken into account. (Note that according to the Académie française , only 5% of French words come from English.) Changes in lexicon / morphology / syntax : The name of the language itself, français , comes from Old French franceis/francesc (compare Medieval Latin franciscus ) from the Germanic frankisc "french, frankish" from Frank ('freeman'). The Franks referred to their land as Franko(n) , which became Francia in Latin in the 3rd century (then an area in Gallia Belgica , somewhere in modern-day Belgium or the Netherlands). The name Gaule ("Gaul") was also taken from the Frankish * Walholant ("Land of the Romans/Gauls"). Several terms and expressions associated with their social structure ( baron/baronne, bâtard, bru, chambellan, échevin, félon, féodal, forban, gars/garçon, leude, lige, maçon, maréchal, marquis, meurtrier, sénéchal ). Military terms ( agrès/gréer, attaquer, bière ["stretcher"], dard, étendard, fief, flanc, flèche, gonfalon, guerre, garder, garnison, hangar, heaume, loge, marcher, patrouille, rang, rattraper, targe, trêve, troupe ). Colours derived from Frankish and other Germanic languages ( blanc/blanche, bleu, blond/blonde, brun, fauve, gris, guède ). Other examples among common words are abandonner, arranger, attacher, auberge, bande, banquet, bâtir, besogne, bille, blesser, bois, bonnet, bord, bouquet, bouter, braise, broderie, brosse, chagrin, choix, chic, cliché, clinquant, coiffe, corroyer, crèche, danser, échaffaud, engage, effroi, épargner, épeler, étal, étayer, étiquette, fauteuil, flan, flatter, flotter, fourbir, frais, frapper, gai, galant, galoper, gant, gâteau, glisser, grappe, gratter, gredin, gripper, guère, guise, hache, haïr, halle, hanche, harasser, héron, heurter, jardin, jauger, joli, laid, lambeau, layette, lécher, lippe, liste, maint, maquignon, masque, massacrer, mauvais, mousse, mousseron, orgueil, parc, patois, pincer, pleige, rat, rater, regarder, remarquer, riche/richesse, rime, robe, rober, saisir, salon, savon, soupe, tampon, tomber, touaille, trépigner, trop, tuyau and many words starting with a hard g (like gagner, garantie, gauche, guérir ) or with an aspired h ( haine, hargneux, hâte, haut ) [ 19 ] Endings in -ard (from Frankish hard : canard, pochard, richard ), -aud (from Frankish wald : crapaud , maraud, nigaud ), -an/-and (from old suffix -anc, -enc : paysan, cormoran, Flamand, tisserand, chambellan ) all very common family name affixes for French names . Endings in -ange (Eng. -ing , Grm. -ung ; boulange/boulanger, mélange/mélanger, vidange/vidanger ), diminutive -on ( oisillon ) Many verbs ending in -ir (2nd group, see French conjugation ) such as affranchir, ahurir, choisir, guérir, haïr, honnir, jaillir, lotir, nantir, rafraîchir, ragaillardir, tarir , etc. The prefix mé(s)- (from Frankish " missa- ", as in mésentente , mégarde , méfait , mésaventure , mécréant , mépris , méconnaissance , méfiance , médisance ) The prefix for-, four- as in forbannir, forcené, forlonger, (se) fourvoyer , etc. from Frankish fir-, fur- (cf German ver- ; English for- ) merged with Old French fuers "outside, beyond" from Latin foris . Latin foris was not used as a prefix in Classical Latin, but appears as a prefix in Medieval Latin following the Germanic invasions. The prefix en- , em- (which reinforced and merged with Latin in- "in, on, into") was extended to fit new formations not previously found in Latin. Influenced or calqued from Frankish * in- and * an- , usually with an intensive or perfective sense: emballer, emblaver, endosser, enhardir, enjoliver, enrichir, envelopper: The syntax shows the systematic presence of a subject pronoun in front of the verb, as in the Germanic languages: je vois , tu vois , il voit . The subject pronoun is optional, function of the parameter pro-drop, in most other Romance languages (as in Spanish veo , ves , ve ). The inversion of subject-verb to verb-subject to form the interrogative is characteristic of the Germanic languages but is not found in any major Romance language, except Venetian and French ( Vous avez un crayon. vs. Avez-vous un crayon? : "Do you have a pencil?"). The adjective placed in front of the noun is typical of Germanic languages. The word order is more frequent in French than in the other major Romance languages and is occasionally compulsory ( belle femme , vieil homme , grande table , petite table ). When it is optional, it can change the meaning: grand homme ("great man") and le plus grand homme ("the greatest man") vs. homme grand ("tall man") and l'homme le plus grand ("the tallest man"), certaine chose vs. chose certaine . In Walloon , the order "adjective + noun" is the general rule, as in Old French and North Cotentin Norman. Several words are calqued or modelled on corresponding terms from Germanic languages ( bienvenue, cauchemar, chagriner, compagnon, entreprendre, manoeuvre, manuscrit, on, pardonner, plupart, sainfoin, tocsin, toujours ). Frankish had a determining influence on the birth of Old French, which partly explains that Old French is the earliest-attested Romance language, such as in the Oaths of Strasbourg and Sequence of Saint Eulalia . [ 20 ] The new speech diverged so markedly from the Latin that it was no longer mutually intelligible. The Old Low Frankish influence is also primarily responsible for the differences between the langue d'oïl and langue d'oc ( Occitan ) since different parts of Northern France remained bilingual in Latin and Germanic for several centuries, which [ 21 ] correspond exactly to the places in which the first documents in Old French were written. Frankish shaped the popular Latin spoken there and gave it a very distinctive character compared to the other future Romance languages. The very first noticeable influence is the substitution of a Germanic stress accent for the Latin melodic accent, [ 22 ] which resulted in diphthongisation, distinction between long and short vowels and the loss of the unaccentuated syllable and of final vowels: Latin decima > F dîme (> E dime . Italian decima ; Spanish diezmo ); Vulgar Latin dignitate > OF deintié (> E dainty . Occitan dinhitat ; Italian dignità ; Spanish dignidad ); VL catena > OF chaiene (> E chain . Occitan cadena ; Italian catena ; Spanish cadena ). On the other hand, a common word like Latin aqua > Occitan aigue became Old French ewe > F eau 'water' (and évier sink) and was likely influenced by the OS or OHG word pronunciation aha (PG * ahwo ). In addition, two new phonemes that no longer existed in Vulgar Latin returned: [h] and [w] (> OF g(u)- , ONF w- cf. Picard w- ), e.g. VL altu > OF halt 'high' (influenced by OLF *hauh ; ≠ Italian, Spanish alto ; Occitan naut ); VL vespa > F guêpe (ONF wespe ; Picard wespe ) 'wasp' (influenced by OLF *waspa ; ≠ Occitan vèspa ; Italian vespa ; Spanish avispa ); L viscus > F gui 'mistletoe' (influenced by OLF *wihsila 'morello', together with analogous fruits, when they are not ripe; ≠ Occitan vesc ; Italian vischio ); LL vulpiculu 'little fox' (from L vulpes 'fox') > OF g[o]upil (influenced by OLF *wulf 'wolf'; ≠ Italian volpe ). Italian and Spanish words of Germanic origin borrowed from French or directly from Germanic also retained [gw] and [g]: It, Sp. guerra 'war'. These examples show a clear result of bilingualism, which frequently altered the initial syllable of the Latin. There is also the converse example in which the Latin word influenced the Germanic word: framboise 'raspberry' from OLF *brambasi (cf. OHG brāmberi > Brombeere 'mulberry'; E brambleberry ; *basi 'berry' cf. Got. -basi , Dutch bes 'berry') conflated with LL fraga or OF fraie 'strawberry', which explains the shift to [f] from [b], and in turn the final -se of framboise turned fraie into fraise (≠ Occitan fragosta 'raspberry', Italian fragola 'strawberry'. Portuguese framboesa 'raspberry' and Spanish frambuesa are from French). [ 23 ] Philologists such as Pope (1934) estimate that perhaps 15% of the vocabulary of Modern French still derives from Germanic sources, but the proportion was larger in Old French, as the language was re-Latinised and partly Italianised by clerics and grammarians in the Middle Ages and later [ citation needed ] . Nevertheless, many such words like haïr "to hate" (≠ Latin odiare > Italian odiare , Spanish odiar , Occitan asirar ) and honte "shame" (≠ Latin vĕrēcundia > Occitan vergonha , Italian vergogna , Spanish vergüenza ) remain common. Urban T. Holmes Jr. estimated that German was spoken as a second language by public officials in western Austrasia and Neustria as late as the 850s and that it had completely disappeared as a spoken language from those regions only in the 10th century, [ 24 ] but some traces of Germanic elements still survive, especially in dialectal French ( Poitevin , Norman , Burgundian , Walloon , Picard etc.). Normans and terms from the Low Countries [ edit ] In 1204 AD, the Duchy of Normandy was integrated into the Crown lands of France , and many words were introduced into French from Norman of which about 150 words of Scandinavian origin [ 25 ] are still in use. Most of the words are about the sea and seafaring: abraquer, alque, bagage, bitte, cingler, équiper (to equip), flotte, fringale, girouette, guichet, hauban, houle, hune, mare, marsouin, mouette, quille, raz, siller, touer, traquer, turbot, vague, varangue, varech . Others pertain to farming and daily life: accroupir, amadouer, bidon, bigot, brayer, brette, cottage, coterie, crochet, duvet, embraser, fi, flâner, guichet, haras, harfang, harnais, houspiller, marmonner, mièvre, nabot, nique, quenotte, raccrocher, ricaner, rincer, rogue . Likewise, most words borrowed from Dutch deal with trade or are nautical in nature: affaler , amarrer , anspect , bar (sea-bass), bastringuer , bière (beer), blouse (bump), botte , bouée , bouffer , boulevard , bouquin , cague , cahute , cambuse , caqueter , choquer , diguer , drôle , dune , équiper (to set sail), frelater , fret , grouiller , hareng , hère , lamaneur , lège , manne , mannequin , maquiller , matelot , méringue , moquer , plaque , sénau , tribord , vacarme , as are words from Low German : bivouac , bouder , homard , vogue , yole , and English of this period: arlequin (from Italian arlecchino Norman hellequin OE * Herla cyning ), bateau , bébé , bol ("bowl"), bouline , bousin , cliver , chiffe/chiffon , drague , drain , est , groom , héler , lac (replacing Old French lai ), merlin , mouette , nord , ouest , potasse , rade , rhum , sonde , sud , turf , yacht . Langue d'oïl [ edit ] See also: Old French The area of langues d'oïl For the period until around 1330, some linguists refer to the oïl languages collectively as Old French ( ancien français ). The earliest extant text in French is the Oaths of Strasbourg from 842; Old French became a literary language with the chansons de geste that told tales of the paladins of Charlemagne and the heroes of the Crusades . The medieval Italian poet Dante , in his Latin De vulgari eloquentia , classified the Romance languages into three groups by their respective words for "yes": Nam alii oc, alii si, alii vero dicunt oil , "For some say oc , others say si , others say oïl ". The oïl languages – from Latin hoc ille , "that is it" – occupied northern France, the oc languages – from Latin hoc , "that" – southern France, and the si languages – from Latin sic , "thus" – the Italian and Iberian Peninsulas . Modern linguists typically add a third group within France around Lyon , the "Arpitan" or " Franco-Provençal language ", whose modern word for "yes" is ouè . The Gallo-Romance group in the north of France, the langue d'oïl like Picard , Walloon and Francien , were influenced by the Germanic languages spoken by the Frankish invaders. From the time period of Clovis I , the Franks extended their rule over northern Gaul. Over time, the French language developed from ei