Anarchism - Wikipedia Jump to content From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Political philosophy and movement For other uses, see Anarchism (disambiguation) and Anarchist (disambiguation) . This article is about the philosophy. For the state of society without authority, see Anarchy . Part of a series on Anarchism Definition Glossary Outline Schools of thought Pluralist Anarchism without adjectives Social outlook Individualist Egoist Philosophical Social Economic theories Collectivist Communist Market Mutualist Social causes Black Feminist Green Primitivist Total liberation Queer Religious Buddhist Christian Jewish Muslim Taoist Organizational strategies Insurrectionary Platformist Syndicalist Synthesis Theory Anarchy Anarchist criminology Anationalism Anti-authoritarianism Anti-capitalism Anti-clericalism Anti-imperialism Anti-militarism Anti-statism Classless society Class struggle Critique of work Communitarianism Decentralization Deep ecology Direct action Federalism Free love Freethought Horizontalidad Individualism Internationalism Relationship anarchy Revolution Self-ownership Social ecology Stateless society Practice Organization Anarchist Black Cross Affinity group Bourse du travail Community organizing Consensus decision-making Intentional community Militia Mutual aid Popular assembly Prefigurative politics Security culture Sociocracy Tenants union Trade union Union of egoists Voluntary association Workers' council Methods of Direct action Black bloc Conscientious objector Counter-economics Illegalism Pacifism Propaganda of the deed Refusal of work Rewilding Sabotage Somatherapy Strike action General strike Wildcat strike Squatting Temporary autonomous zone People Alston Armand Ba Bakunin Berkman Bonanno Bookchin Bourdin Chomsky Cleyre Day Déjacque Durruti Ellul Ervin Fanelli Faure Ferrer Feyerabend Giovanni Godwin Goldman González Prada Graeber Guillaume He-Yin Kanno Kōtoku Kropotkin Landauer Liu Magón Makhno Maksimov Malatesta Mett Michel Most Parsons Pi i Margall Pouget Proudhon Raichō Reclus Rocker Santillán Schürmann Spooner Stirner Thoreau Tolstoy Tucker Volin Ward Warren Yarchuk Zerzan Issues Animal rights Arts Capitalism Education Law Love and sex Nationalism Religion Violence History French Revolution Revolutions of 1848 Spanish Regional Federation of the IWA Paris Commune Hague Congress Petroleum Revolution Cantonal rebellion Haymarket affair Trial of the Thirty International Conference of Rome Ferrer movement Strandzha Commune Congress of Amsterdam Tragic Week High Treason Incident Galleanists Manifesto of the Sixteen German Revolution of 1918–1919 Bavarian Soviet Republic 1918 Rio de Janeiro anarchist insurrection 1919 United States bombings Biennio Rosso Kronstadt rebellion Makhnovshchina Amakasu Incident Alt Llobregat insurrection Anarchist insurrection of January 1933 Anarchist insurrection of December 1933 Spanish Revolution of 1936 Barcelona May Days Contemporary anarchism Red inverted triangle Labadie Collection Provo May 1968 Kate Sharpley Library Carnival Against Capital 1999 Seattle WTO protests Really Really Free Market Occupy movement Culture A las Barricadas Anarchist bookfair Anarcho-punk Anarchy in the U.K. Architecture Bourse du travail Circle-A DIY ethic Escuela Moderna Films Freeganism Infoshop Independent Media Center The Internationale May Day Popular education Radical cheerleading Radical environmentalism Self-managed social center Symbolism Economics Cooperative Cost the limit of price Decentralized planned economy Free association Gift economy Give-away shop Industrial democracy Industry self-regulation Labor voucher Local exchange trading system Market socialism Mutual bank Mutual credit Social ownership Wage slavery Workers' control Workers' self-management By region Africa "}]]}'> Algeria Egypt Morocco Nigeria South Africa Tunisia Asia "}]]}'> Armenia Azerbaijan Bangladesh China Hong Kong Egypt Georgia India Indonesia Iran Israel Japan Korea Malaysia Mongolia Philippines Russia Singapore Soviet Union Syria Taiwan Timor-Leste Turkey Vietnam Europe "}]]}'> Albania Andorra Austria Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Latvia Monaco Netherlands Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia Serbia Spain Soviet Union Sweden Switzerland Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom North America "}]]}'> Canada Costa Rica Cuba Dominican Republic El Salvador Guatemala Mexico Nicaragua Panama United States Individualist Puerto Rico Oceania "}]]}'> Australia New Zealand South America "}]]}'> Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Ecuador French Guiana Paraguay Peru Uruguay Venezuela Lists Anarcho-punk bands Books Fictional characters Films Jewish anarchists Musicians Periodicals Related topics Anarcho-capitalism Anti-corporatism Anti-consumerism Anti-fascism Anti-globalization Anti-war movement Autarchism Autonomist marxism Communism Communization Council communism IWA Labour movement Left communism Left-libertarianism Libertarian socialism Marxism National-anarchism Operaismo Relationship between Friedrich Nietzsche and Max Stirner Situationist International Socialism Spontaneous order Anarchism portal Politics portal v t e Anarchism is a far-left political philosophy and movement that seeks to abolish all institutions that perpetuate authority , coercion , or hierarchy , primarily targeting the state , capitalism , and organised religion . Anarchism advocates for the replacement of these hierarchical social structures with stateless societies consisting of horizontal networks of voluntary associations that operate based on the principles of free association and reciprocity . Anarchism is described as being part of the libertarian wing of the socialist movement , broadly known as libertarian socialism . [ 1 ] [ nb 1 ] Although traces of anarchist ideas are found all throughout history , modern anarchism emerged from the Enlightenment . During the latter half of the 19th and the first decades of the 20th century, the anarchist movement flourished in most parts of the world and had a significant role in workers' struggles for their immediate interests and for emancipation . Various anarchist schools of thought formed during this period. Anarchists have taken part in several revolutions , most notably in the Paris Commune , the Russian Civil War and the Spanish Civil War , whose conclusion marked the end of the classical era of anarchism . In the last decades of the 20th and into the 21st century, the anarchist movement has been resurgent, growing in popularity and influence within anti-capitalist , anti-war and anti-globalisation movements. Anarchists employ a range of approaches to social change, often categorised as revolutionary or evolutionary, though the two frequently overlap and are reflected in a diversity of tactics . Evolutionary approaches generally favour gradual and often nonviolent change, while revolutionary approaches seek to destroy oppressive states and institutions. Many facets of human civilisation have been influenced by anarchist theory, critique, and praxis . Etymology, terminology, and definition Main article: Definition of anarchism and libertarianism See also: Glossary of anarchism Pierre-Joseph Proudhon – the first political philosopher to call himself an anarchist [ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] The etymological origin of anarchism is from the Ancient Greek anarkhia (ἀναρχία), meaning "without a ruler", composed of the prefix an- ("without") and the word arkhos ("leader" or "ruler"). The suffix -ism denotes the ideological current that favours anarchy. [ 8 ] Anarchism appears in English from 1642 as anarchisme and anarchy from 1539; early English usages emphasised a sense of disorder. [ 9 ] Various factions within the French Revolution labelled their opponents as anarchists , although few such accused shared many views with later anarchists. Many revolutionaries of the 19th century such as William Godwin (1756–1836) and Wilhelm Weitling (1808–1871) would contribute to the anarchist doctrines of the next generation but did not use anarchist or anarchism in describing themselves or their beliefs. [ 10 ] [ 11 ] The first political philosopher to call himself an anarchist ( French: anarchiste ) and invest the word with a positive meaning was Pierre-Joseph Proudhon (1809–1865). [ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] The anarchist movement appeared between Proudhon and the Saint-Imier Congress (1872), with historians arguing for both. [ 12 ] Since the 1890s and beginning in France, [ 13 ] libertarianism has often been used as a synonym for anarchism; [ 14 ] its use as a synonym is still common around the world. [ 15 ] But in the United States, some usages of libertarianism refer to individualistic free-market philosophy only, and free-market anarchism in particular is termed libertarian anarchism . [ 16 ] While the term libertarian has been largely synonymous with anarchism, [ 17 ] its meaning has more recently been diluted by wider adoption from ideologically disparate groups, [ 18 ] including both the New Left and libertarian Marxists , who do not associate themselves with authoritarian socialists or a vanguard party , and extreme cultural liberals , who are primarily concerned with civil liberties . [ 18 ] Additionally, some anarchists use libertarian socialist [ 1 ] to avoid anarchism's negative connotations and emphasise its connections with socialism . [ 18 ] Anarchism is broadly used to describe the anti-authoritarian wing of the socialist movement . [ 19 ] [ nb 1 ] Anarchism is contrasted to socialist forms which are state-oriented or from above. [ 20 ] Scholars of anarchism generally highlight anarchism's socialist credentials [ 21 ] and criticise attempts at creating dichotomies between the two. [ 22 ] Some scholars describe anarchism as having many influences from liberalism , [ 18 ] and being both liberal and socialist but more so. [ 23 ] Many scholars reject that anarcho-capitalism is anarchist, saying that it is a misunderstanding of anarchist principles. [ 24 ] [ nb 2 ] While opposition to the state is central to anarchist thought, defining anarchism is not an easy task for scholars, as there is much discussion among scholars and anarchists on the matter, and various currents perceive anarchism slightly differently. [ 26 ] [ nb 3 ] Major definitional elements include the will for a non-coercive society, the rejection of the state apparatus, the belief that human nature allows humans to exist in or progress toward such a non-coercive society, and a suggestion on how to act to pursue the ideal of anarchy. [ 29 ] History Main article: History of anarchism Pre-modern era Zeno of Citium ( c. 334 – c. 262 BC ), whose Republic inspired Peter Kropotkin [ 30 ] The most notable precursors to anarchism in the ancient world were in China and Greece . In China, philosophical anarchism (the discussion on the legitimacy of the state) was delineated by Taoist philosophers Zhuang Zhou and Laozi . [ 31 ] Alongside Stoicism , Taoism has been said to have had "significant anticipations" of anarchism. [ 32 ] Anarchic attitudes were also articulated by tragedians and philosophers in Greece. Aeschylus and Sophocles used the myth of Antigone to illustrate the conflict between laws imposed by the state and personal autonomy . Socrates questioned Athenian authorities constantly and insisted on the right of individual freedom of conscience . Cynics dismissed human law ( nomos ) and associated authorities while trying to live according to nature ( physis ). Stoics were supportive of a society based on unofficial and friendly relations among its citizens without the presence of a state. [ 33 ] In the Sasanian Empire (224-651 CE), Mazdak called for an egalitarian society and the abolition of monarchy , only to be soon executed by Emperor Kavad I . [ 34 ] In Basra , religious sects preached against the state. [ 35 ] In medieval Europe , there was no anarchistic activity except some ascetic religious movements. Various European religious sects developed anti-state and libertarian tendencies. [ 36 ] These, and other Muslim movements, later gave birth to religious anarchism . [ 34 ] Renewed interest in antiquity during the Renaissance and in private judgement during the Reformation restored elements of anti-authoritarian secularism in Europe, particularly in France. [ 37 ] Enlightenment challenges to intellectual authority (secular and religious) and the revolutions of the 1790s and 1848 all spurred the ideological development of what became the era of classical anarchism. [ 38 ] Modern era The Paris Commune , one of the earliest experiments of anarchism During the French Revolution , partisan groups such as the Enragés and the sans-culottes saw a turning point in the fermentation of anti-state and federalist sentiments. [ 39 ] The first anarchist currents developed throughout the 19th century: William Godwin espoused philosophical anarchism in England , morally delegitimising the state, while Max Stirner 's thinking paved the way to individualism and Pierre-Joseph Proudhon 's theory of mutualism found fertile soil in France . [ 40 ] By the late 1870s, various anarchist schools of thought had become well-defined and a wave of then-unprecedented globalisation occurred from 1880 to 1914. [ 41 ] This era of classical anarchism lasted until the end of the Spanish Civil War and is considered the golden age of anarchism. [ 40 ] Mikhail Bakunin opposed the Marxist aim of dictatorship of the proletariat and allied himself with the federalists in the First International before his expulsion by the Marxists. Drawing from mutualism, Mikhail Bakunin founded collectivist anarchism and entered the International Workingmen's Association , a class worker union later known as the First International that formed in 1864 to unite diverse revolutionary currents. The International became a significant political force, with Karl Marx being a leading figure and a member of its General Council. Bakunin's faction (the Jura Federation ) and Proudhon's followers (the mutualists) opposed state socialism , advocating political abstentionism and small property holdings. [ 42 ] After bitter disputes, the Bakuninists were expelled from the International by the Marxists at the 1872 Hague Congress . [ 43 ] Anarchists were treated similarly in the Second International , being ultimately expelled in 1896. [ 44 ] Bakunin predicted that if revolutionaries gained power by Marx's terms, they would end up the new tyrants of workers . In response to their expulsion from the First International, anarchists formed the St. Imier International . Under the influence of Peter Kropotkin , a Russian philosopher and scientist, anarcho-communism overlapped with collectivism. [ 45 ] Anarcho-communists, who drew inspiration from the 1871 Paris Commune , advocated for free federation and for the distribution of goods according to one's needs . [ 46 ] During this time, a minority of anarchists adopted tactics of revolutionary political violence , known as propaganda of the deed . [ 47 ] The dismemberment of the French socialist movement into many groups and the execution and exile of many Communards to penal colonies following the suppression of the Paris Commune favoured individualist political expression and acts. [ 48 ] Even though many anarchists distanced themselves from these terrorist acts, infamy came upon the movement and attempts were made to prevent anarchists immigrating to the US , including the Immigration Act of 1903 , also called the Anarchist Exclusion Act. [ 49 ] Illegalism was another strategy which some anarchists adopted during this period. [ 50 ] By the turn of the 20th century, the terrorist movement had died down, giving way to anarchist communism and syndicalism , while anarchism had spread all over the world. [ 51 ] [ 52 ] In China , small groups of students imported the humanistic pro-science version of anarcho-communism. [ 53 ] Tokyo was a hotspot for rebellious youth from East Asian countries, who moved to the Japanese capital to study. [ 54 ] In Latin America , Argentina was a stronghold for anarcho-syndicalism , where it became the most prominent left-wing ideology. [ 55 ] Anarchists were involved in the Strandzha Commune and Krusevo Republic established in Macedonia in Ilinden–Preobrazhenie Uprising of 1903, and in the Mexican Revolution of 1910. The revolutionary wave of 1917–23 saw varying degrees of active participation by anarchists. [ 56 ] Nestor Makhno seen with members of the anarchist Revolutionary Insurgent Army of Ukraine Despite concerns, anarchists enthusiastically participated in the Russian Revolution in opposition to the White movement , especially in the Makhnovshchina . Seeing the victories of the Bolsheviks in the October Revolution and the resulting Russian Civil War , many workers and activists turned to Communist parties , which grew at the expense of anarchism and other socialist movements. In France and the United States, members of major syndicalist movements such as the General Confederation of Labour and the Industrial Workers of the World left their organisations and joined the Communist International . [ 57 ] However, anarchists met harsh suppression after the Bolshevik government had stabilised, including during the Kronstadt rebellion . [ 58 ] Several anarchists from Petrograd and Moscow fled to Ukraine, before the Bolsheviks crushed the anarchist movement there too. [ 58 ] With the anarchists being repressed in Russia, two new antithetical currents emerged, namely platformism and the anarchist synthesis . The former sought to create a coherent group that would push for revolution while the latter were against anything that would resemble a political party. In the Spanish Civil War of 1936–39, anarchists and syndicalists ( CNT and FAI ) once again allied themselves with various currents of leftists. A long tradition of Spanish anarchism led to anarchists playing a pivotal role in the war, and particularly in the Spanish Revolution of 1936 . In response to the army rebellion , an anarchist-inspired movement of peasants and workers, supported by armed militias, took control of Barcelona and of large areas of rural Spain, where they collectivised the land. [ 59 ] The Soviet Union provided some limited assistance at the beginning of the war, but the result was a bitter fight between communists and other leftists in a series of events known as the May Days , as Joseph Stalin asserted Soviet control of the Republican government, ending in another defeat of anarchists at the hands of the communists. [ 60 ] Post-WWII This anarchist symbol , commonly known as the circle-A , represents the core principles of anarchism, including individual freedom and anti-authoritarianism [ 61 ] By the end of World War II , the anarchist movement had been severely weakened. [ 62 ] The 1960s witnessed a revival of anarchism, likely caused by a perceived failure of Marxism–Leninism and tensions built by the Cold War . [ 63 ] During this time, anarchism found a presence in other movements critical towards both capitalism and the state such as the anti-nuclear , environmental , and peace movements , the counterculture of the 1960s , and the New Left . [ 64 ] It also saw a transition from its previous revolutionary nature to provocative anti-capitalist reformism . [ 65 ] Anarchism became associated with punk subculture as exemplified by bands such as Crass and the Sex Pistols . [ 66 ] The established feminist tendencies of anarcha-feminism returned with vigour during the second wave of feminism . [ 67 ] Black anarchism began to take form at this time and influenced anarchism's move from a Eurocentric demographic. [ 68 ] This coincided with its failure to gain traction in Northern Europe and its unprecedented height in Latin America. [ 69 ] Black bloc organising during the Battle of Seattle Around the turn of the 21st century, anarchism grew in popula