Synthetic biology - Wikipedia Jump to content From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Interdisciplinary branch of biology and engineering "Artificial life form" redirects here. For simulated life forms, see Artificial life . Synthetic Biology Research at NASA Ames Research Center Part of a series of articles on Synthetic biology Synthetic biological circuits Synthetic gene database BioBrick Registry of Standard Biological Parts Genome editing CRISPR Gene therapy Synthetic immunology Artificial cells Artificial gene synthesis Synthetic genomics Mycoplasma laboratorium Protocell Xenobiology Nucleic acid analogue Xeno nucleic acid Unnatural base pair Expanded genetic code Mirror life Other topics Hazards Open synthetic biology Do-it-yourself biology v t e Synthetic biology ( SynBio ) is a multidisciplinary scientific field that applies the principles of engineering to develop new biological parts, devices, and systems or to redesign existing systems found in nature. [ 1 ] The field encompasses a broad range of methodologies from various disciplines, such as biochemistry , biotechnology , biomaterials , material science/engineering , genetic engineering , molecular biology , molecular engineering , systems biology , membrane science , biophysics , chemical and biological engineering , electrical and computer engineering , control engineering and evolutionary biology . It includes designing and constructing biological modules , biological systems , and biological machines , or re-designing existing biological systems for useful purposes. [ 2 ] Additionally, it is the branch of science that focuses on the new abilities of engineering into existing organisms to redesign them for useful purposes. [ 3 ] In order to produce predictable and robust systems with novel functionalities that do not already exist in nature, it is also necessary to apply the engineering paradigm of systems design to biological systems. According to the European Commission , this possibly involves a molecular assembler based on biomolecular systems such as the ribosome . [ 4 ] History [ edit ] Further information: Timeline of biotechnology 1910: First identifiable use of the term synthetic biology in Stéphane Leduc 's publication Théorie physico-chimique de la vie et générations spontanées . [ 5 ] He also noted this term in another publication, La Biologie Synthétique in 1912. [ 6 ] 1944 : Canadian-American scientist Oswald Avery shows that DNA is the material of which genes and chromosomes are made. This becomes the bedrock on which all subsequent genetic research is built. [ 7 ] 1953 : Francis Crick and James Watson publish the structure of the DNA in Nature . 1961 : Jacob and Monod postulate cellular regulation by molecular networks from their study of the lac operon in E. coli and envisioned the ability to assemble new systems from molecular components. [ 8 ] 1973 : First molecular cloning and amplification of DNA in a plasmid is published in P.N.A.S. by Cohen, Boyer et al. constituting the dawn of synthetic biology. [ 9 ] 1978 : Arber , Nathans and Smith win the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for the discovery of restriction enzymes , leading Szybalski to offer an editorial comment in the journal Gene : The work on restriction nucleases not only permits us easily to construct recombinant DNA molecules and to analyze individual genes, but also has led us into the new era of synthetic biology where not only existing genes are described and analyzed but also new gene arrangements can be constructed and evaluated. [ 10 ] 1988 : First DNA amplification by the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) using a thermostable DNA polymerase is published in Science by Mullis et al. [ 11 ] This obviated adding new DNA polymerase after each PCR cycle, thus greatly simplifying DNA mutagenesis and assembly. 2000 : Two papers in Nature report synthetic biological circuits , a genetic toggle switch and a biological clock, by combining genes within E. coli cells. [ 12 ] [ 13 ] 2003 : The most widely used standardized DNA parts, BioBrick plasmids, are invented by Tom Knight . [ 14 ] These parts will become central to the International Genetically Engineered Machine (iGEM) competition founded at MIT in the following year. Synthetic Biology Open Language (SBOL) standard visual symbols for use with BioBricks Standard 2003 : Researchers engineer an artemisinin precursor pathway in E. coli . [ 15 ] 2004 : First international conference for synthetic biology, Synthetic Biology 1.0 (SB1.0) is held at MIT. 2005 : Researchers develop a light-sensing circuit in E. coli . [ 16 ] Another group designs circuits capable of multicellular pattern formation. [ 17 ] 2006 : Researchers engineer a synthetic circuit that promotes bacterial invasion of tumour cells. [ 18 ] 2010 : Researchers publish in Science the first synthetic bacterial genome, called M. mycoides JCVI-syn1.0. [ 19 ] [ 20 ] The genome is made from chemically-synthesized DNA using yeast recombination. 2011 : Functional synthetic chromosome arms are engineered in yeast. [ 21 ] 2012 : Charpentier and Doudna labs publish in Science the programming of CRISPR-Cas9 bacterial immunity for targeting DNA cleavage. [ 22 ] This technology greatly simplified and expanded eukaryotic gene editing. 2019 : Scientists at ETH Zurich report the creation of the first bacterial genome , named Caulobacter ethensis-2.0 , made entirely by a computer, although a related viable form of C. ethensis-2.0 does not yet exist. [ 23 ] [ 24 ] 2019 : Researchers report the production of a new synthetic (possibly artificial ) form of viable life , a variant of the bacteria Escherichia coli , by reducing the natural number of 64 codons in the bacterial genome to 59 codons instead, in order to encode 20 amino acids . [ 25 ] [ 26 ] 2020 : Scientists created the first xenobot , a programmable synthetic organism derived from frog cells and designed by AI. [ 27 ] Demis Hassabis and John M. Jumper presented an AI model called AlphaFold 2. With its help, they have been able to predict the structure of virtually all the 200 million proteins that researchers have identified. Since their breakthrough, AlphaFold2 has been used by more than two million people from 190 countries. Among a myriad of scientific applications, researchers can now better understand antibiotic resistance and create images of enzymes that can decompose plastic. [ 28 ] [ 29 ] 2021 : Scientists reported that xenobots are able to self-replicate by gathering loose cells in the environment and then forming new xenobots. [ 30 ] 2023 : Advancements in RNA therapeutics, including vaccines, RNA circuits, and genetic modifications, have improved safety and efficiency in synthetic biology. RNA-based therapeutics are considered safer than DNA-based systems as they do not integrate into the host genome, reducing the risk of unintended genetic alterations. Additionally, RNA-based systems, constructed from RNA devices and circuits, act more rapidly than DNA-based counterparts since they do not require transcription. These advancements have expanded the potential applications of RNA in gene therapy, personalized medicine, and vaccine development. [ 31 ] Perspectives [ edit ] Synthetic biology is a field whose scope is expanding in terms of systems integration, engineered organisms, and practical findings. [ 1 ] Engineers view biology as technology (in other words, a given system includes biotechnology or its biological engineering ). [ 32 ] Synthetic biology includes the broad redefinition and expansion of biotechnology, with the ultimate goal of being able to design and build engineered live biological systems that process information, manipulate chemicals, fabricate materials and structures, produce energy, provide food, and maintain and enhance human health, as well as advance fundamental knowledge of biological systems (see Biomedical engineering ) and our environment. [ 33 ] Researchers and companies working in synthetic biology are using nature's power to solve issues in agriculture, manufacturing, and medicine. [ 3 ] Due to more powerful genetic engineering capabilities and decreased DNA synthesis and sequencing costs , the field of synthetic biology is rapidly growing. In 2016, more than 350 companies across 40 countries were actively engaged in synthetic biology applications; all these companies had an estimated net worth of $3.9 billion in the global market. [ 34 ] Synthetic biology currently has no generally accepted definition. Here are a few examples: It is the science of emerging genetic and physical engineering to produce new (and, therefore, synthetic) life forms. To develop organisms with novel or enhanced characteristics, this emerging field of study combines biology, engineering, and related disciplines' knowledge and techniques to design chemically synthesized DNA. [ 35 ] [ 36 ] Biomolecular engineering includes approaches that aim to create a toolkit of functional units that can be introduced to present new technological functions in living cells. Genetic engineering includes approaches to construct synthetic chromosomes or minimal organisms like Mycoplasma laboratorium . Biomolecular design refers to the general idea of de novo design and additive combination of biomolecular components. Each of these approaches shares a similar task: to develop a more synthetic entity at a higher level of complexity by inventively manipulating a simpler part at the preceding level. [ 37 ] [ 38 ] Optimizing these exogenous pathways in unnatural systems takes iterative fine-tuning of the individual biomolecular components to select the highest concentrations of the desired product. [ 39 ] On the other hand, "re-writers" are synthetic biologists interested in testing the irreducibility of biological systems. Due to the complexity of natural biological systems, it would be simpler to rebuild the natural systems of interest from the ground up; to provide engineered surrogates that are easier to comprehend, control and manipulate. [ 40 ] Re-writers draw inspiration from refactoring , a process sometimes used to improve computer software. Categories [ edit ] Bioengineering, synthetic genomics, protocell synthetic biology, unconventional molecular biology, and in silico techniques are the five categories of synthetic biology. [ 41 ] It is necessary to review the distinctions and analogies between the categories of synthetic biology for its social and ethical assessment, to distinguish between issues affecting the whole field and particular to a specific one. [ 41 ] Bioengineering [ edit ] The subfield of bioengineering concentrates on creating novel metabolic and regulatory pathways, and is currently the one that likely draws the attention of most researchers and funding. It is primarily motivated by the desire to establish biotechnology as a legitimate engineering discipline. When referring to this area of synthetic biology, the word "bioengineering" should not be confused with "traditional genetic engineering", which involves introducing a single transgene into the intended organism. Bioengineers adapted synthetic biology to provide a substantially more integrated perspective on how to alter organisms or metabolic systems. [ 41 ] A typical example of single-gene genetic engineering is the insertion of the human insulin gene into bacteria to create transgenic proteins. The creation of whole new signalling pathways, containing numerous genes and regulatory components (such as an oscillator circuit to initiate the periodic production of green fluorescent protein (GFP) in mammalian cells), is known as bioengineering as part of synthetic biology. [ 41 ] By utilising simplified and abstracted metabolic and regulatory modules as well as other standardized parts that may be freely combined to create new pathways or creatures, bioengineering aims to create innovative biological systems. In addition to creating infinite opportunities for novel applications, this strategy is anticipated to make bioengineering more predictable and controllable than traditional biotechnology. [ 41 ] Synthetic genomics [ edit ] The formation of animals with a chemically manufactured (minimal) genome is another facet of synthetic biology that is highlighted by synthetic genomics. This area of synthetic biology has been made possible by ongoing advancements in DNA synthesis technology, which now makes it feasible to produce DNA molecules with thousands of base pairs at a reasonable cost. The goal is to combine these molecules into complete genomes and transplant them into living cells, replacing the host cell's genome and reprogramming its metabolism to perform different functions. [ 41 ] Scientists have previously demonstrated the potential of this approach by creating infectious viruses by synthesising the genomes of multiple viruses. These significant advances in science and technology triggered the initial public concerns concerning the risks associated with this technology. [ 41 ] A simple genome might also work as a "chassis genome" that could be enlarged quickly by gene inclusion created for particular tasks. Such "chassis creatures" would be more suited for the insertion of new functions than wild organisms since they would have fewer biological pathways that could potentially conflict with the new functionalities in addition to having specific insertion sites. Synthetic genomics strives to create creatures with novel "architectures," much like the bioengineering method. It adopts an integrative or holistic perspective of the organism. In this case, the objective is the creation of chassis genomes based on necessary genes and other required DNA sequences rather than the design of metabolic or regulatory pathways based on abstract criteria. [ 41 ] Protocell synthetic biology [ edit ] The in vitro generation of synthetic cells is the protocell branch of synthetic biology. Lipid vesicles, which have all the necessary components to function as a complete system, can be used to create these artificial cells. In the end, these synthetic cells should meet the requirements for being deemed alive, namely the capacity for self-replication, self-maintenance, and evolution. The protocell technique has this as its end aim, however there are other intermediary steps that fall short of meeting all the criteria for a living cell. In order to carry out a specific function, these lipid vesicles contain cell extracts or more specific sets of biological macromolecules and complex structures, such as enzymes, nucleic acids, or ribosomes. For instance, liposomes may carry out particular polymerase chain reactions or synthesise a particular protein. [ 41 ] Innovations in synthetic biology have led to the development of organelle-like scaffolds using phase-separated biomolecular condensates to compartmentalize cellular processes in Escherichia coli, such as RNA-based TEARS. [ 42 ] These membraneless organelles can be engineered to scaffold metabolic pathways, [ 43 ] or enabling protein purification with no traditional external chromatography materials by a workflow termed PandaPure. [ 44 ] Protocell synthetic biology takes artificial life one step closer to reality by eventually synthesizing not only the genome but also every component of the cell in vitro, as opposed to the synthetic genomics approach, which relies on coercing a natural cell to carry out the instructions encoded by the introduced synthetic genome. Synthetic biologists in this field view their work as basic study into the conditions necessary for life to exist and its origin more than in any of the other techniques. The protocell technique, however, also lends itself well to applications; similar to other synthetic biology byproducts, protocells could be employed for the manufacture of biopolymers and medicines. [ 41 ] Unconventional molecular biology [ edit ] The objective of the "unnatural molecular biology" strategy is to create new varieties of life that are based on a different kind of molecular biology, such as new types of nucleic acids or a new genetic code. The creation of new types of nucleotides that can be built into unique nucleic acids could be accomplished by changing certain DNA or RNA constituents, such as the bases or the backbone sugars. [ 41 ] The normal genetic code is being altered by inserting quadruplet codons or changing some codons to encode new amino acids, which would subsequently permit the use of non-natural amino acids with unique features in protein production. It is a scientific and technological problem to adjust the enzymatic machinery of the cell for both approaches. [ 41 ] A new sort of life would be formed by organisms with a genome built on synthetic nucleic acids or on a totally new coding system for synthetic amino acids. This new style of life would have some benefits but also some new dangers. On release into the environment, there would be no horizontal gene transfer or outcrossing of genes with natural species. Furthermore, these kinds of synthetic organisms might be created to require non-natural materials for protein or nucleic acid synthesis, rendering them unable to thrive in the wild if they accidentally escaped. [ 41 ] On the other hand, if these organisms ultimately were able to survive outside of controlled space, they might have a particular benefit over natural organisms because they would be resistant to predatory living organisms or natural viruses, that could lead to an unmanaged spread of the synthetic organisms. [ 41 ] In silico technique [ edit ] Synthetic biology in silico and the various strategies are interconnected. The development of complex designs, whether they are metabolic pathways, fundamental cellular processes, or chassis genomes, is one of the major difficulties faced by the four synthetic-biology methods outlined above. Because of this, synthetic biology has a robust in silico branch, similar to systems biology, that aims to create computational models for the design of common biological components or synthetic circuits, which are essentially simulations of synthetic organisms. [ 41 ] The practical application of simulations and models through bioengineering or other fields of synthetic biology is the long-term goal of in silico synthetic biology. Many of the computational simulations of synthetic organisms up to this point possess little to no direct analogy to living things. Due to this, in silico synthetic biology is regarded as a separate group in this article. [ 41 ] It is sensible to integrate the five areas under the umbrella of synthetic biology as one unified area of study. Even though they focus on various facets of life, such as metabolic regulation, essential elements, or biochemical makeup, these five strategies all work toward the same end: creating new types of living organisms. Additionally, the varied methodologies begin with numerous methodological approaches, which leads to the diversity of synthetic biology approaches. [ 41 ] Synthetic biology is an interdisciplinary field that draws from and is inspired by many different scientific disciplines, not one single field or technique. Synthetic biologists all have the same underlying objective of designing and producing new forms of life, despite the fact that they may employ various methodologies, techniques, and research instruments. Any evaluation of synthetic biology, whether it examines ethical, legal, or safety considerations, must take into account the fact that while some questions, risks, and issues are unique to each technique, in other circumstances, synthetic biology as a whole must be taken into consideration. [ 41 ] Four engineering approaches [ edit ] Synthetic biology has traditionally been divided into four different engineering approaches: top down, parallel, orthogonal and bottom up. [ 45 ] To replicate emergent behaviours from natural biology and build artificial life, unnatural chemicals are used. The other looks for interchangeable 