Mathematics - Wikipedia Jump to content From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Field of knowledge "Math" and "Maths" redirect here. For other uses, see Mathematics (disambiguation) and Math (disambiguation) . Illuminated letter P at the beginning of Adelard of Bath 's translation of Euclid's Elements , which starts " Punctum est illud cui pars non est " (A point is that which has no part). [ 1 ] Geometry is shown personified as a woman, following Martianus Capella 's De nuptiis Philologiae et Mercurii . [ 2 ] Mathematics is a field of knowledge concerned with abstract concepts such as numbers, geometric shapes, sets, functions, and probabilities. It uses logical reasoning and proof to study and establish their properties, often expressed as theorems, formulas, and equations. Mathematics is used to model and solve problems in science, engineering, technology, economics, and everyday life. There are many areas of mathematics, including number theory (the study of integers and their properties), algebra (the study of operations and the structures they form), geometry (the study of shapes and spaces that contain them), analysis (the quantitative study of approximation and convergence), and set theory (presently used as a foundation for all mathematics). Mathematics involves the description and manipulation of abstract objects that are either abstractions from nature or purely abstract entities that are stipulated to have certain properties, called axioms . Mathematics uses pure reason to prove the properties of objects through proofs , which consist of a succession of applications of deductive rules to already established results. These results, called theorems , include previously proved theorems, axioms, and — in case of abstraction from nature — some basic properties that are considered true starting points of the theory under consideration. [ 3 ] Mathematics is essential in the natural sciences , engineering , medicine , finance , computer science , and the social sciences . Although mathematics is widely used to model empirical phenomena, its results are established by deductive proof rather than by experiment. The relationship between mathematical truth, logic, and reality is a subject of philosophical debate . Some areas of mathematics, such as game theory , are developed in close correlation with their applications and are often grouped under applied mathematics . Other areas are developed independently from any application but often find practical applications later. [ 4 ] [ 5 ] Mathematical written records first appeared in Ancient Egypt and Mesopotamia , but the concept of proof and its associated mathematical rigor began in Ancient Greek mathematics , exemplified in Euclid 's Elements . [ 6 ] Mathematics was primarily divided into geometry and arithmetic until the 16th and 17th centuries, when algebra [ a ] and infinitesimal calculus evolved into new fields. Since then, the interaction between mathematical innovations and scientific discoveries has led to a correlated increase in the development of both. [ 7 ] At the end of the 19th century, the foundational crisis of mathematics led to the systematic use of the axiomatic method , [ 8 ] which heralded a dramatic increase in the number of mathematical areas and their fields of application. The contemporary Mathematics Subject Classification lists more than sixty first-level areas of mathematics. [ 9 ] [ 10 ] Areas of mathematics Before the Renaissance , mathematics was divided into two main areas: arithmetic , regarding the study and manipulation of numbers, and geometry , regarding the study of shapes. [ 11 ] Some types of pseudoscience , such as numerology and astrology , were not then clearly distinguished from mathematics. [ 12 ] Beginning with the Renaissance, two more areas became predominant. New mathematical notation led to modern algebra which, roughly speaking, begins with the study and manipulation of algebraic expressions . Calculus , consisting of the two subfields differential calculus and integral calculus , originated with geometry but evolved into the study of continuous functions , which model the typically nonlinear relationships between varying quantities, as represented by variables . This division into four main areas — arithmetic, geometry, algebra, and calculus [ 13 ] — endured until the end of the 19th century. Other areas that were previously studied by mathematicians, such as celestial mechanics and solid mechanics , are now considered as belonging to physics. [ 14 ] The subject of combinatorics has been studied for much of recorded history, yet did not become a separate branch of mathematics until the 17th century. [ 15 ] At the end of the 19th century, the foundational crisis in mathematics and the systematic use of the axiomatic method led to an explosion of new areas of mathematics. [ 16 ] [ 8 ] The 2020 Mathematics Subject Classification contains no less than sixty-three first-level areas. [ 10 ] Some of these areas correspond to the older division, as is true regarding number theory (the modern name for higher arithmetic ) and geometry. Several other first-level areas have "geometry" in their names or are otherwise commonly considered part of geometry. Algebra and calculus do not appear as first-level areas but are split into several first-level areas. Other first-level areas emerged during the 20th century or had not previously been considered as mathematics, such as mathematical logic and foundations . [ 9 ] Number theory Main article: Number theory This is the Ulam spiral , which illustrates the distribution of prime numbers . The dark diagonal lines in the spiral hint at the hypothesized approximate independence between being prime and being a value of a quadratic polynomial, a conjecture now known as Hardy and Littlewood's Conjecture F . Number theory evolved from the manipulation of numbers , that is, natural numbers ( N ) , {\displaystyle (\mathbb {N} ),} and later expanded to integers ( Z ) {\displaystyle (\mathbb {Z} )} and rational numbers ( Q ) . {\displaystyle (\mathbb {Q} ).} Number theory was once called arithmetic, but nowadays this term is mostly used for numerical calculations . [ 17 ] The study of numbers arguably dates back to ancient Babylon and probably China , but developed into a distinct discipline in Ancient Greece . Two prominent early number theorists were Euclid and Diophantus of Alexandria . [ 18 ] The modern study of number theory in its abstract form is largely attributed to Pierre de Fermat and Leonhard Euler . The field came to full fruition with the contributions of Adrien-Marie Legendre and Carl Friedrich Gauss . [ 19 ] Many easily stated number problems have solutions that require sophisticated methods, often from across mathematics. A prominent example is Fermat's Last Theorem . This conjecture was stated in 1637 by Pierre de Fermat, but it was proved only in 1994 by Andrew Wiles , who used tools including scheme theory from algebraic geometry , category theory , and homological algebra . [ 20 ] Another example is Goldbach's conjecture , which asserts that every even integer greater than 2 is the sum of two prime numbers . Stated in 1742 by Christian Goldbach , it remains unproven despite considerable effort. [ 21 ] Number theory includes several subareas, including analytic number theory , algebraic number theory , geometry of numbers (method oriented), Diophantine analysis , and transcendence theory (problem oriented). [ 9 ] Geometry Main article: Geometry On the surface of a sphere, Euclidean geometry only applies as a local approximation. For larger scales the sum of the angles of a triangle is not equal to 180°. Geometry is one of the oldest branches of mathematics. It started with empirical recipes concerning shapes, such as lines , angles and circles , which were developed mainly for the needs of surveying and architecture , but has since blossomed out into many other subfields. [ 22 ] A fundamental innovation was the ancient Greeks' introduction of the concept of proofs , which require that every assertion must be proved . For example, it is not sufficient to verify by measurement that, say, two lengths are equal; their equality must be proven via reasoning from previously accepted results ( theorems ) and a few basic statements. The basic statements are not subject to proof because they are self-evident ( postulates ), or are part of the definition of the subject of study ( axioms ). This principle, foundational for all mathematics, was first elaborated for geometry, and was systematized by Euclid around 300 BC in his book Elements . [ 23 ] [ 24 ] The resulting Euclidean geometry is the study of shapes and their arrangements constructed from lines, planes and circles in the Euclidean plane ( plane geometry ) and the three-dimensional Euclidean space . [ b ] [ 22 ] Euclidean geometry was developed without change of methods or scope until the 17th century, when René Descartes introduced what is now called Cartesian coordinates . This constituted a major change of paradigm : Instead of defining real numbers as lengths of line segments (see number line ), it allowed the representation of points using their coordinates , which are numbers. Algebra (and later, calculus) can thus be used to solve geometrical problems. Geometry was split into two new subfields: synthetic geometry , which uses purely geometrical methods, and analytic geometry , which uses coordinates systemically. [ 25 ] Analytic geometry allows the study of curves unrelated to circles and lines. Such curves can be defined as the graph of functions , the study of which led to differential geometry . They can also be defined as implicit equations , often polynomial equations (which spawned algebraic geometry ). Analytic geometry also makes it possible to consider Euclidean spaces of higher than three dimensions. [ 22 ] In the 19th century, mathematicians discovered non-Euclidean geometries , which do not follow the parallel postulate . By questioning that postulate's truth, this discovery has been viewed as joining Russell's paradox in revealing the foundational crisis of mathematics . This aspect of the crisis was solved by systematizing the axiomatic method, and adopting that the truth of the chosen axioms is not a mathematical problem. [ 26 ] [ 8 ] In turn, the axiomatic method allows for the study of various geometries obtained either by changing the axioms or by considering properties that do not change under specific transformations of the space . [ 27 ] Today's subareas of geometry include: [ 9 ] Projective geometry , introduced in the 16th century by Girard Desargues , extends Euclidean geometry by adding points at infinity at which parallel lines intersect. This simplifies many aspects of classical geometry by unifying the treatments for intersecting and parallel lines. Affine geometry , the study of properties relative to parallelism and independent from the concept of length. Differential geometry , the study of curves, surfaces, and their generalizations, which are defined using differentiable functions . Manifold theory , the study of shapes that are not necessarily embedded in a larger space. Riemannian geometry , the study of distance properties in curved spaces. Algebraic geometry , the study of curves, surfaces, and their generalizations, which are defined using polynomials . Topology , the study of properties that are kept under continuous deformations . Algebraic topology , the use in topology of algebraic methods, mainly homological algebra . Discrete geometry , the study of finite configurations in geometry. Convex geometry , the study of convex sets , which takes its importance from its applications in optimization . Complex geometry , the geometry obtained by replacing real numbers with complex numbers . Algebra Main article: Algebra The quadratic formula , which concisely expresses the solutions of all quadratic equations The Rubik's Cube group is a concrete application of group theory . [ 28 ] Algebra is the art of manipulating equations and formulas. Diophantus (3rd century) and al-Khwarizmi (9th century) were the two main precursors of algebra. [ 29 ] [ 30 ] Diophantus solved some equations involving unknown natural numbers by deducing new relations until he obtained the solution. [ 31 ] Al-Khwarizmi introduced systematic methods for transforming equations, such as moving a term from one side of an equation into the other side. [ 32 ] The term algebra is derived from the Arabic word al-jabr meaning 'the reunion of broken parts' that he used for naming one of these methods in the title of his main treatise . [ 33 ] [ 34 ] Algebra became an area in its own right only with François Viète (1540–1603), who introduced the use of variables for representing unknown or unspecified numbers. [ 35 ] Variables allow mathematicians to describe the operations that have to be done on the numbers represented using mathematical formulas . [ 36 ] Until the 19th century, algebra consisted mainly of the study of linear equations (presently linear algebra ), and polynomial equations in a single unknown , which were called algebraic equations (a term still in use, although it may be ambiguous). During the 19th century, mathematicians began to use variables to represent things other than numbers (such as matrices , modular integers , and geometric transformations ), on which generalizations of arithmetic operations are often valid. [ 37 ] The concept of algebraic structure addresses this, consisting of a set whose elements are unspecified, of operations acting on the elements of the set, and rules that these operations must follow. The scope of algebra thus grew to include the study of algebraic structures. This object of algebra was called modern algebra or abstract algebra , as established by the influence and works of Emmy Noether , [ 38 ] and popularized by Van der Waerden 's book Moderne Algebra . Some types of algebraic structures have useful and often fundamental properties, in many areas of mathematics. Their study became autonomous parts of algebra, and include: [ 9 ] group theory field theory vector spaces , whose study is essentially the same as linear algebra ring theory commutative algebra , which is the study of commutative rings , includes the study of polynomials , and is a foundational part of algebraic geometry homological algebra Lie algebra and Lie group theory Boolean algebra , which is widely used for the study of the logical structure of computers The study of types of algebraic structures as mathematical objects is the purpose of universal algebra and category theory . [ 39 ] The latter applies to every mathematical structure (not only algebraic ones). At its origin, it was introduced, together with homological algebra for allowing the algebraic study of non-algebraic objects such as topological spaces ; this particular area of application is called algebraic topology . [ 40 ] Calculus and analysis Main articles: Calculus and Mathematical analysis A Cauchy sequence consists of elements such that all subsequent terms of a term become arbitrarily close to each other as the sequence progresses (from left to right). Calculus, formerly called infinitesimal calculus, was introduced independently and simultaneously by 17th-century mathematicians Newton and Leibniz . [ 41 ] It is fundamentally the study of the relationship between variables that depend continuously on each other. Calculus was expanded in the 18th century by Euler with the introduction of the concept of a function and many other results. [ 42 ] Presently, "calculus" refers mainly to the elementary part of this theory, and "analysis" is commonly used for advanced parts. [ 43 ] Analysis is further subdivided into real analysis , where variables represent real numbers , and complex analysis , where variables represent complex numbers . Analysis includes many subareas shared by other areas of mathematics which include: [ 9 ] Multivariable calculus Functional analysis , where variables represent varying functions Integration , measure theory and potential theory , all strongly related with probability theory on a continuum Ordinary differential equations Partial differential equations Numerical analysis , mainly devoted to the computation of solutions of ordinary and partial differential equations that arise in many applications Discrete mathematics Main article: Discrete mathematics A diagram representing a two-state Markov chain . The states are represented by 'A' and 'E'. The numbers are the probability of flipping the state. Discrete mathematics, broadly speaking, is the study of individual, countable mathematical objects. An example is the set of all integers. [ 44 ] Because the objects of study here are discrete, the methods of calculus and mathematical analysis do not directly apply. [ c ] Algorithms — especially their implementation and computational complexity — play a major role in discrete mathematics. [ 45 ] The four color theorem and optimal sphere packing were two major problems of discrete mathematics solved in the second half of the 20th century. [ 46 ] The P versus NP problem , which remains open to this day, is also important for discrete mathematics, since its solution would potentially impact a large number of computationally difficult problems. [ 47 ] Discrete mathematics includes: [ 9 ] Combinatorics , the art of enumerating mathematical objects that satisfy some given constraints. Originally, these objects were elements or subsets of a given set ; this has been extended to various objects, which establishes a strong link between combinatorics and other parts of discrete mathematics. For example, discrete geometry includes counting configurations of geometric shapes . Graph theory and hypergraphs Coding theory , including error correcting codes and a part of cryptography Matroid theory Discrete geometry Discrete probability distributions Game theory (although continuous games are also studied, most common games, such as chess and poker are discrete) Discrete optimization , including combinatorial optimization , integer programming , constraint programming Mathematical logic and set theory Main articles: Mathematical logic and Set theory The Venn diagram is a commonly used method to illustrate the relations between sets. The two subjects of mathematical logic and set theory have belonged to mathematics since the end of the 19th century. [ 48 ] [ 49 ] Before this period, sets were not considered to be mathematical objects, and logic , although used for mathematical proofs, belonged to philosophy and was not specifically studied by mathematicians. [ 50 ] Before Cantor 's study of infinite sets , mathematicians were reluctant to consider actually infinite collections, and considered infinity to be the result of endless enumeration . Cantor's work offended many mathematicians not only by considering actually infinite sets [ 51 ] but by showing that this implies different sizes of infinity, per Cantor's diagonal argument . This led to the controversy over Cantor's set theory . [ 52 ] In the same period, various areas of mathematics concluded the former intuitive definitions of the basic mathematical objects were insufficient for ensuring mathematical rigor . [ 53 ] This became the foundational crisis of mathematics. [ 54 ] It was eventually solved in mainstream mathematics by systematizing the axiomatic method inside a formalized set theory . Roughly speaking, each mathematical object is defined by the set of all similar objects and the properties that these objects must have. [ 16 ] For example, in Peano arithmetic , the natural numbers are defined by "zero is a number", "each number has a unique successor", "each number but zero has a unique predecessor", and some rules of reasoning. [ 55 ] This mathematical abstraction from reality is embodied in the modern philosophy of formalism , as founded by David Hilbert around 1910. [