Evolutionary psychiatry - Wikipedia Jump to content From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Discipline of psychiatry based on evolutionary biology Not to be confused with Evolutionary psychology . Evolutionary psychiatry , also known as Darwinian psychiatry , [ 1 ] [ 2 ] is a theoretical approach to psychiatry that aims to explain psychiatric disorders in evolutionary terms. [ 3 ] [ 4 ] As a branch of the field of evolutionary medicine , it is distinct from the medical practice of psychiatry in its emphasis on providing scientific explanations rather than treatments for mental disorders. This often concerns questions of ultimate causation . For example, psychiatric genetics may discover genes associated with mental disorders, but evolutionary psychiatry asks why those genes persist in the population. Other core questions in evolutionary psychiatry are why heritable mental disorders are so common, [ 5 ] how to distinguish mental function and dysfunction, [ 6 ] and whether certain forms of suffering conveyed an adaptive advantage. [ 7 ] Disorders commonly considered are depression , anxiety , schizophrenia , autism , eating disorders , and others. Key explanatory concepts include evolutionary mismatch (when modern environments cause mental health conditions) and the fact that evolution is guided by reproductive success rather than health or wellbeing . Rather than providing an alternative account of the cause of mental disorder, evolutionary psychiatry seeks to integrate findings from traditional schools of psychology and psychiatry such as social psychology , behaviourism , biological psychiatry and psychoanalysis into a holistic account related to evolutionary biology. In this sense, its aims meet the criteria of a Kuhnian paradigm shift . [ citation needed ] Evolutionary psychiatry is heavily influenced by evolutionary psychology , [ 3 ] but as Abed and St John-Smith wrote in 2016, "Unlike evolutionary psychology, which is a vibrant and thriving sub-discipline of academic psychology with a strong and well-funded research program, evolutionary psychiatry remains the interest of a small number of psychiatrists who are thinly scattered across the world." [ 8 ] It has gained increasing institutional recognition in recent years, including the formation of an evolutionary psychiatry special interest group within the Royal College of Psychiatrists and the Section on Evolutionary Psychiatry within the World Psychiatric Association , [ 8 ] and has gained traction with the publication of texts aimed at a popular audience such as Good Reasons for Bad Feelings: Insight from the Frontier of Evolutionary Psychiatry [ 7 ] by Randolph Nesse. History [ edit ] The pursuit of evolutionary psychiatry in its modern form can be traced to the late 20th century. Landmark texts include George Williams and Randolph Nesse 's Why We Get Sick: The New Science of Darwinian Medicine [ 9 ] (which could also be considered as marking the beginning of evolutionary medicine), Evolutionary Psychiatry: A New Beginning by John Price and Anthony Stevens, and others. However, the questions with which evolutionary psychiatry concerns itself have a longer history, for instance being recognised by Julian Huxley and Ernst Mayr in an early paper [ 10 ] considering possible evolutionary explanations for what has become known as the 'schizophrenia paradox'. Concepts applied by modern evolutionary psychiatry to explain mental disorder are also much older than the field in many cases. Psychological suffering as an inevitable, and sometimes useful, part of human existence has long been recognised, and the idea of divine madness pervades ancient societies and religions. Cesare Lombroso , a pioneering psychiatrist, began utilising evolutionary theory to explain mental disorder as early as 1864, proposing that insanity was the price of genius, as human brains had not evolved with the capacity to become hyper-intelligent and creative and yet remain sane. [ 11 ] Darwin applied evolutionary theory to explain psychological traits and emotions, and recognised the usefulness of studying mental disorders in pursuit of understanding natural psychological function. Freud was heavily influenced by Darwinian theory, and towards the end of his life recommended psychoanalysts should study evolutionary theory. [ 12 ] Bowlby 's attachment theory was developed in explicit reference to evolutionary theory. [ 13 ] Evolutionary Psychiatry Special Interest Group (EPSIG) [ edit ] In 2016, the Evolutionary Psychiatry Special Interest Group (EPSIG) was set up in the Royal College of Psychiatrists , UK by Riadh Abed and Paul St-John Smith. [ 8 ] It is now the largest global institution for connecting psychiatrists and researchers interested in evolutionary psychiatry, [ 14 ] with over 1700 members. [ 15 ] It has run several seminars and meetings dedicated to evolutionary psychiatry, hosting lectures by prominent academics such as Simon Baron-Cohen and Robin Dunbar . All of the meetings are available on the EPSIGUK YouTube channel. [ 16 ] EPSIG also publishes regular newsletters, [ 17 ] organises conferences, conducts interviews, and hosts special essays related to evolutionary psychiatry (for which there is not yet a dedicated academic journal). As Riadh Abed (previous chair) stated in a newsletter, "Our aims are both big and radical: they are for evolution to be accepted as the overarching framework for psychiatry and for evolution to take center stage in our understanding of mental health and mental disorder." [ 14 ] Abed and St-John Smith edited a 2022 volume Evolutionary Psychiatry: Current Perspectives on Evolution and Mental Health , [ 18 ] co-published by the Royal College of Psychiatrists and Cambridge University Press, marking the most extensive publication in the field to date, and forming the basis for the first podcast dedicated to evolutionary psychiatry, the 'Evolving Psychiatry' podcast. Psychological function and dysfunction [ edit ] Mental disorders are often defined by 'dysfunction' in psychiatric manuals such as the DSM , without a precise definition of what constitutes dysfunction, allowing any mental state deemed socially unacceptable (such as homosexuality ) to be considered dysfunctional, and thus a mental disorder. Adam Hunt argues that evolutionary theory is uniquely placed to be able to distinguish biological function from dysfunction by evolutionary processes. [ 19 ] Unlike the objects and processes of physics and chemistry , which cannot strictly be said to be functioning nor dysfunctioning, [ 20 ] biological systems are the products of evolution by natural selection , and so their 'function' and 'dysfunction' can be related to that evolutionary process. The concept of evolutionary function is tied to the reproductive success brought about by phenotypes which caused genes to be propagated. Eyes evolved to see – the function of the eyes is to see – so dysfunctional eyes are those that cannot see. This sense of function is defined by the evolutionary history of eyesight providing reproductive success, not current cultural opinions of normality and abnormality on which common conceptions of health and disorder often depend. [ 21 ] Jerome Wakefield's influential 'Harmful Dysfunction' definition of disorder utilises evolutionarily selected effects to ground the concept of 'dysfunction' in the objective process of evolution. Wakefield proposes that mental disorder must be both harmful, in a value-defined sense, and dysfunctional, in an evolutionary sense. This grounding of dysfunction in an objective historical process is important in the context of psychiatry's history of labelling socially undesirable mental states and traits as 'disorders', such as female masturbation and homosexuality. Current diagnostic manuals are decided by consensus. For example, in 1973 the APA called a vote to reconsider homosexuality's status as a mental disorder. By a 58% majority, it was struck off. [ 22 ] The category of borderline personality disorder was created upon the basis of a single paper and consensus between about a dozen psychiatrists. [ 23 ] In 2014 psychiatrists voted on the features of a new disorder, internet gaming disorder . [ 24 ] Psychiatry's reliance on votes and expert consensus rather than objective evidence or biomarkers has been the subject of longstanding criticism, which evolutionary psychiatry can avoid [ according to whom? ] by adopting the evolutionary definition of dysfunction. Evolutionary causation and Tinbergen's four questions [ edit ] Further information: Tinbergen's four questions The research questions and concerns of evolutionary medicine and psychiatry can be distinguished from normal biomedicine and biological-psychiatry research as asking ultimate instead of proximate questions. This ultimate-proximate distinction was introduced by Ernst Mayr [ 25 ] to identify different levels of causational explanation: proximate explanations refer to mechanistic biological processes (e.g. genes, ontogenetic development, hormones, neurological structure and function) whilst ultimate explanations ask about the evolutionary process of natural selection which led to these biological structures and processes functioning as observed. This could be conceived of as proximate explanations are 'how' questions whilst ultimate explanations are 'why' questions. Niko Tinbergen further deconstructed this ultimate-proximate distinction into his 'four questions'. [ 26 ] These questions of mechanism, ontogeny, function and phylogeny can be asked of any single trait or disorder (often behavioural, although not necessarily) to identify the different questions of causation which are simultaneously relevant. Proximate questions can be separated into questions of mechanism, which concerns how the trait works, the structure and process of its biological mechanism, and questions of ontogeny or individual development which concerns how the trait develops in an individual. Ultimate questions can be either of or evolutionary function or adaptive value, which concerns how the trait influenced fitness throughout evolutionary history; and questions of phylogeny or evolution, which concern the history of a trait down the phylogenetic tree. To take the example of depression, we can ask about proximate mechanisms (e.g., neurotransmitter properties), ontogenetic development (e.g., neurological development over an individual's lifespan), adaptive function (e.g., low mood system) and phylogeny (e.g., apparent low mood in reaction to social defeat in primates). Key explanatory concepts in evolutionary psychiatry [ edit ] Mental disorder results from many different environmental and genetic causes, with various complex neurological correlates – but evolutionary medicine recognises several general principles which allow vulnerability to disorder. Adapted from Nesse (2019), [ 7 ] Stearns (2016) [ 27 ] and Gluckman (2016). [ 28 ] Reproductive success over health [ edit ] Natural selection acts on reproductive fitness , not biological states which are what may be considered healthy; healthy states are only selected if they also have positive effects on reproductive success. This is used in evolutionary medicine to explain aging and diseases of senescence: diseases which appear past reproductive age have minimal effect on fecundity. Psychological suffering and various cognitive states which may seem unhealthy or disorderly may equally be products of evolutionary processes if they increased reproductive success. Evidence of this may be seen in disorders associated with substantial apparent dysfunction, yet average levels of fertility. Mismatch [ edit ] Evolutionary mismatch occurs when evolved traits become maladaptive due to changes in the environment. This is a common factor causing evolutionary change (e.g. in the peppered moth) and is relevant to medicine when the mismatched traits cause problems affecting health. Psychiatric conditions may in some cases be evolved states which we are misinterpreting as disorders because they no longer fit our social expectations; or they may be mental states or traits which would manifest healthily in ancestral environments, but become pathological due to some feature of modern environments. Evidence of mismatch is most prominent when comparing traditional-living humans to modern-living humans or when new environmental factors arise which clearly cause disease (e.g. the availability of cheap, high calorie foods causing obesity). Defences [ edit ] Psychological responses such as fear and panic are adaptive in many situations, [ 29 ] especially of imminent danger, and seen in multiple species. Certain mental disorders may result from such responses, either as a maladaptive overactivation of the response, or as an adaptive process which is specifically tuned to over-activate because the fitness cost of the response is outweighed by the fitness benefit – called the smoke detector principle. [ 30 ] The fact that such experiences are highly distressing, debilitating and inappropriate leads to their diagnosis as mental disorders. Mutation-selection balance [ edit ] Natural selection acts upon genetic mutations , which are present in every generation, removing those which reduce fitness and increasing the prevalence of those which improve fitness. Mutations are also more likely to reduce fitness than improve it. Biological traits with a large mutational target size, such as brains, where over 80% of the genome is expressed, [ 31 ] are especially likely to be suspect to harmful mutations which negatively affect cognitive function, which are then removed by natural selection. Such mutations are often associated with intellectual disability, certain cases of autism , schizophrenia , and many more disorders. The fact that de-novo mutations cause such disorders in a few cases has been used to argue that the other cases are caused by as-yet undiscovered disease processes, although the presence of heterogeneity within disorder categories and the lack of discovered pathology despite significant work in neuroscience and genetics is evidence against that view. Evolutionary explanations for specific disorders [ edit ] Schizophrenia [ edit ] Main article: Evolution of schizophrenia Schizophrenia is primarily characterized by psychosis ( hallucinations and delusions ) and symptoms of cognitive debilitation such as erratic speech, lost interest in normal activities and disordered thinking. It is the most extreme condition of the schizophrenia spectrum , which includes schizophrenia and other psychotic disorders, arguably extending beyond clinical disorders to unusual experiences such as perceiving ghosts or believing in magic which are common in the population. Schizophrenia is a heritable condition, appearing in slightly less than 1% of the population, with negative effects of fecundity, especially in men. [ 32 ] Because of this, it was perhaps the first psychiatric condition explicitly raised as specifically requiring an evolutionary explanation, [ 10 ] in the so-called 'schizophrenia paradox' (now more generally known as the paradox of common, harmful, heritable mental disorders [ 5 ] ). To explain schizophrenia's persistence, various evolutionary hypotheses have been proposed. Hypotheses of schizophrenia as a true dysfunction are plentiful. It has been hypothesised that schizophrenia is a dysfunctional byproduct of human evolution for language and brain lateralization , [ 33 ] or a dysfunction of the social brain, [ 34 ] or related to theory-of-mind . [ 35 ] Other theories have referred to the possibility it is caused by mutation-selection balance . [ 5 ] However, the expected rare and de novo mutations have only been found in a small proportion of cases. [ 36 ] Many alleles predisposing individuals to schizophrenia are common in the population, making adaptive hypotheses plausible, as has been noted since the mid-20th century. [ 10 ] Hypotheses explaining schizophrenia as resulting from adaptation vary widely. Early theorists proposed it conveyed improvements to the immune system or illness recovery [ 10 ] or facilitated group-splitting. [ 37 ] Inspired by the longstanding cultural ideas of madness as related to genius , Daniel Nettle proposed that schizotypy could be related to creative success, [ 38 ] which added to mating success, and that the positive effects of schizotypal traits might be an explanation for why these traits persist. However, the measured fecundity benefit of such traits has been found to not outweigh the cost of schizophrenia via inclusive fitness (although this may be due to selection bias ). [ 39 ] The shamanism hypothesis of schizophrenia states that in traditional societies the experience of psychosis facilitated the induction of shamans ( magico-religious practitioners such as medicine men, diviners, witch doctors, exorcists and mediums). Shamanism is a common feature of human societies, with certain individuals deemed to have a particular connection to the supernatural world which gives them the ability to perform magic, especially healing. This has been used by proponents of the shamanism hypothesis to explain why psychotic experiences often feature religious and grandiose content and beliefs of holding supernatural powers, claims which may have been accepted by society more broadly in traditional cultures. The onset of schizophrenia also closely resembles shamanic initiations, which often feature hallucinations, delusions and incoherent speech. Possible links between shamanism and insanity have been recognised for many decades by anthropologists (e.g. "...mentally ill people are often regarded as holy in primitive societies" [ 40 ] and "Feeblemindedness is treated with scorn in Niue today, but insanity still calls forth respect" [ 41 ] ) but the most recent iteration of the theory has been advanced by Joseph Polimeni, [ 42 ] who argues that shamans facilitate group functioning, and so psychosis evolved as a result of group selection. Critics [ who? ] have argued that the trance states and self-control exhibited by shamans are unlike the characteristics of schizophrenia. [ citation needed ] Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) [ edit ] Research on Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) in evolutionary psychiatry explores the origins of this condition by considering how certain traits may have been advantageous in ancestral environments. Within this framework, the goal is to understand why behaviors associated with the disorder persist in the human population. One hypothesis suggests that traits like hyperactivity, impulsivity, and novelty-seeking were beneficial for hunter-gatherer societies. These characteristics could enhance survival by promoting exploration, quick decision-making, and adaptability in changing environments. The "hunter versus farmer" theory posits that while such traits were advantageous for nomadic hunters, they became less suitable with the advent of sedentary agricultural societies, leading to conflicts with modern social structures and expectations. [ 43 ] [ 44 ] Proponents of this view argue that ADHD behaviors are not inherently pathological but are mismatches between ancient adaptive traits and contemporary environments. This argument fits into larger idea of neurodiversity and encourages a re-evaluation of ADHD, promoting understanding and adaptation rather than solely focusing on symptom management. Some psychiatrists have even begun to cater to the evolutionary framework of ADHD. [ 45 ] Critics [ who? ] caution that evolutionary explanations may oversimplify the complex interplay of genetic, environmental, and neurodevelopmental factors that contribute to ADHD. They emphasize the importance of evidence-based approaches in diagnosis and treatment, arguing that while evolutionary theories provide interesting insights, they should not replace established scientific methodologies. This said, the enticing idea t