Reticular materials - Wikipedia Jump to content From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Reticular materials are artificial materials that have been engineered at the molecular level to achieve certain properties, in particular a high porosity and high surface area. Reticular materials can be grouped into three major classes, in the order of their discovery: metal-organic frameworks or MOFs, covalent organic frameworks or COFs, and hydrogen-bonded organic frameworks or HOFs, each with respective sub-classes. An example for a sub-class of MOFs are zeolitic Imidazolate Frameworks (ZIFs). MOFs are the most explored sub-class of reticular materials (around 77% of the approximately 48,000 publications on reticular materials between the 1990s to 2023 were on MOFs). [ 1 ] MOFs are a type (or subclass) of coordination polymers . [ 2 ] Around 99 thousand synthetic variants of MOF are known. [ 3 ] The structures and functionality of reticular materials, for example the pore size, are adjustable (or “tailorable”) during the synthesis process. [ 4 ] This makes them in principle adjustable to many different technical requirements. [ 5 ] Depending on the choice of materials and synthesis methods, reticular materials, because of the strong bonds, can be designed to withstand extreme temperatures and harsh chemical environments over extended periods of time. [ 6 ] This field was pioneered by Susumu Kitagawa , Richard Robson , and Omar M. Yaghi starting in the 1990s. These three scientists received the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 2025 “for the development of metal–organic frameworks”. [ 7 ] There are many potential applications for reticular materials, although only very few applications have reached a commercial level to date. The initial application of reticular materials was mostly for gas adsorption and storage, followed later by other fields such as catalysis, biomedicine, and membrane technologies. [ 8 ] Examples for gas adsorption and storage technologies with reticular materials include carbon capture and storage , direct air capture , atmospheric water harvesting and hydrogen storage. These are all applications that several start-up or commercial companies are now pursuing. Other applications that are being researched, including for biomedicine and catalysis, are still in their infancy and emerging states. [ 8 ] Research is ongoing around the world to take the most promising reticular materials into the full-scale commercialization process for real-world applications. [ 8 ] Hindering factors include scalability, high costs of reticular materials, reproducibility and poor technology readiness level. [ 8 ] [ 3 ] The company BASF produces raw MOFs at commercial quantities. [ 9 ] Definition and overview [ edit ] Reticular materials are materials that are constructed based on the concept of reticular chemistry. The term reticular is derived from the Latin term reticulum meaning net-like . The first-discovered and largest class of reticular materials are metal–organic frameworks (MOFs ) but there are other classes, too, as well as many sub-classes. The two main other classes of reticular materials are covalent organic framework (COFs) and hydrogen-bonded organic framework (HOFs) . Reticular chemistry involves the “connection of individual building units such as molecules and clusters using robust bonding to form extensive and coherent architectures with highly ordered arrangement in a designed manner”. [ 6 ] In other words, reticular chemistry is “concerned with linking molecular building units by strong bonds to make crystalline large and extended structures”. [ 10 ] The term reticular synthesis , or reticular chemistry was introduced in 2002–2003 by the research team at UC Berkeley led by Omar M. Yaghi . [ 11 ] This emerging field of reticular chemistry has at its core inorganic and organic chemistry but it also adds the new chemistry of using the strong metal-ion-based bonds and covalent bonds to link molecules into extended structures, features unattainable prior to reticular chemistry. [ 12 ] Prior to the discovery of MOFs, zeolites and activated carbons were the main porous materials used in industry for applications where a high surface area was required. However, the surface area of MOFs is much higher than that of zeolites and activated carbons, i.e. in the range of 1000–10,000 m 2 /g. [ 13 ] This makes them an interesting material for industry. In addition, the structure of the cavities and the size of the pore in MOFs can be tailored as a function of metal ions, organic ligands, and synthesis conditions, and hence are thus amenable to engineering for targeted applications. [ 3 ] History [ edit ] Further information: Metal–organic framework § History , Covalent organic framework § History , Hydrogen-bonded organic framework § History , and Zeolitic imidazolate framework § History In the 1990s, the research activities of Omar M. Yaghi first at the Arizona State University and then at University of Michigan in the United States involved synthesizing ordered molecular structures. In 1999 he and co-authors published an article in Nature called “Design and synthesis of an exceptionally stable and highly porous metal-organic framework” where they described MOF-5 , the first MOF to exhibit ultra-high porosity. [ 14 ] This marked the beginning of a new research field. The new term metal–organic framework was coined by that research group. [ 11 ] The evolution of porous materials with diverse topologies has a rich history, traced back to the assembly of inorganic clusters into extended frameworks. This was followed by the synthesis of metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) in the 1990s, which involved linking organic molecules and metal ions. Subsequently, covalent organic frameworks (COFs) emerged after first being synthesized by Omar M. Yaghi and his group in 2005. [ 15 ] COFs are a type of reticular material that links organic molecules together. This was later followed by hydrogen-bonded organic frameworks (HOFs) (since around 2011), representing the latest generation of reticular materials. [ 6 ] A publication in 2011 by Banglin Chen (University of Texas at San Antonio) introduced the term HOF to the scientific community. [ 4 ] [ 16 ] The three scientists Omar M. Yaghi , Susumu Kitagawa , and Richard Robson (from left to right) received the Nobel Prize for Chemistry in 2025 for the development of metal–organic frameworks which is a sub-category of reticular materials. Almost 48 000 publications on reticular materials have been published in the three decades between the 1990s and 2023. Of these publications, most of them (around 77%) are on MOFs. They are the most explored sub-class of reticular materials. [ 1 ] Reticular materials are now (as of 2022) the “fastest-growing class of materials in chemistry and most-productive research hotspot among global communities of chemistry, engineering, and materials science.” [ 4 ] The scientists Omar M. Yaghi, Susumu Kitagawa and Richard Robson received the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 2025 “for the development of metal–organic frameworks”. [ 7 ] They have pioneered the field of reticular materials and chemistry. Terminology [ edit ] There are many other terms that are related to reticular materials in the scientific literature, making it confusing for non-experts, as some terms are synonyms, some are “historical”, whereas others describe sub-classes or overarching terms. Also in some cases, different research groups use different terminology. [ 17 ] Some publications use the term MOF informally like a synonym of reticular materials , so that MOF would include COF and HOF as well. However, this is imprecise usage and a linguistic simplification. Adding to the confusion is that compounds with metal ions bound by organic linkers have been “differently named: metal-organic frameworks , coordination polymers , metal-organic polymers , hybrid organic-inorganic materials and organic zeolite analogues ”. [ 18 ] It was Yaghi's group at the university UC Berkeley that bestowed these materials with a distinctive naming convention, highlighting their contribution to the field. In 2006, the same group proposed the systematic name of zeolitic imidazolate frameworks , abbreviated as ZIF. [ 6 ] The IUPAC Recommendations from 2013 recommended a hierarchical terminology as follows “the most general term is coordination polymer . Coordination networks are a subset of coordination polymers and MOFs a further subset of coordination networks ”. [ 17 ] Therefore, MOFs are a type (or subclass) of coordination polymers . [ 2 ] The term porous polymer is also used as an overarching term for MOFs, COFs and HOFs. With regards to sub-classes of reticular materials: Porous organic frameworks (POFs) are a sub-class of reticular materials and thought to be among the most significant categories of reticular materials. [ 6 ] Reticular framework nanoparticles (RFNPs) are also a sub-class of reticular materials. [ 6 ] Classes [ edit ] Classification systems [ edit ] Reticular materials can be grouped into three major classes: metal-organic frameworks (MOFs), covalent organic frameworks (COFs), and hydrogen-bonded organic frameworks (HOFs), each with respective sub-classes: Metal-organic frameworks (MOFs) (with a range of sub-classes for example Cyclodextrin-metal–organic framework (CD-MOF), [ 19 ] Zeolitic Imidazolate Frameworks (ZIFs), Carboxylate-based metal–organic frameworks , Conductive metal−organic frameworks ) Covalent organic frameworks (COFs) Hydrogen-bonded organic frameworks (HOFs) Metal-organic framework (MOF) [ edit ] The first reticular framework was synthesized in 1995, when it was discovered that metal ions could be bound to charged bonding agents, such as carboxylates, leading to the formation of crystalline 2D structures. A major breakthrough was achieved by linking inorganic clustered secondary building units (SBUs) with shape-defining connectors using strong molecular bonds. [ 6 ] Schematic representation of the basic structure of metal-organic frameworks (MOFs) [ 20 ] Metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) are porous materials made from metal ions or clusters (also called joints ) connected by organic ligands ( linkers ). These components combine to form structural units known as secondary building units (SBUs). A wide range of metal ions can be used, including transition metals, lanthanides, alkali metals and many others. Also the organic linkers can contain many different functional groups such as carboxylate, phosphonate, sulfonate, pyridyl, imidazolate. [ 13 ] During the initial stages of their development, the primary objective was centered on synthesizing new MOF structures. However, as the field progressed, there was a gradual transition toward studying the performance and applications of MOFs, which gained momentum with the emergence of stable MOFs like UiO, MIL, and ZIF. [ 6 ] To indicate a specific MOF, different naming methods are used: One way is to write MOF followed by a number, e.g. MOF-5 . Another option is to include the location of the research group (like UiOs for University of Oslo, NU for Northwestern University, or HKUST for Hong Kong University of Science and Technology or LIC for Leiden Institute of Chemistry) or the name of the research team (like CPL, F-MOF-1, and MOP-1). [ 21 ] MOF crystal size can be controlled at the nanometre level to build MOF nanoparticles (abbreviated as MOF NPs ). [ 22 ] The zeolite imidazolate frameworks (ZIFs) are a type of MOF and consist of many different materials. They all share a similar structure: transition metals such as zinc, iron, copper, or cobalt are connected by nitrogen atoms and linked together by imidazole rings. [ 21 ] A selection of notable MOFs, their key characteristics and applications. These MOFs are notable based on the timing of their discovery (e.g. being the first one) or because of full scale applications. Name Key characteristics Possible applications (mostly laboratory; few large-scale) Source MOF-5 One of the earliest MOFs discovered (research published in 1999) Composed of zinc oxide (Zn 4 O) clusters and terephthalic acid (BDC) ligands Large surface area and high porosity Thermally stable up to 300°C (does not collapse up to that temperature) Has played a significant role in the development of porous materials for energy and environmental applications Gas storage, particularly hydrogen storage and carbon dioxide capture [ 14 ] [ 11 ] MOF-74 One-dimensional (1D) channel structure and honeycomb-like network with high porosity Composed of metal ions, such as magnesium (Mg), cobalt (Co), or nickel (Ni), connected by 2,5-dihydroxyterephthalic acid (DHTA) linkers High surface area and open metal sites Gas adsorption applications, especially for hydrogen and carbon dioxide; gas storage [ 15 ] MIL-101 Composed of chromium (Cr) nodes and terephthalic acid (BDC) linkers Very large pore size and high surface area, making it one of the most porous MOFs synthesized Gas storage (hydrogen and CO 2 ), separation, and catalysis, energy storage and environmental remediation (water pollution control) [ 23 ] MOF-177 Composed of zinc (Zn) nodes and terephthalate linkers. Very large pore volume and high surface area, making it one of the most porous MOFs synthesized. Langmuir surface area of 4500 m²/g Gas storage and separation, particularly for hydrogen and carbon dioxide capture [ 24 ] [ 11 ] UiO-66 (University of Oslo-66) Composed of zirconium (Zr) nodes and terephthalic acid (BDC) ligands. Very high chemical and thermal stability, making it a versatile material for various applications in harsh conditions. Gas storage, separation, and catalysis [ 25 ] CD-MOF (Cyclodextrin-based MOFs) Composed of γ-cyclodextrin (γ-CD) and alkali metal cations Non-toxic (even edible) and renewable Can be efficiently synthesized on a large scale from natural carbohydrates. Biocompatible and scalable Drug delivery, CO 2 capture, separation/purification, adsorption, sensors, food packaging, electrical conductors, memristors , photocatalysis , and polymerization. [ 26 ] [ 13 ] [ 27 ] ZIF-8 Composed of zinc (Zn) nodes and imidazolate linkers. Very high thermal and chemical stability, as well as structural flexibility. High selectivity for CO 2 over other gases Gas storage and separation, particularly for CO 2 capture; environmental remediation [ 28 ] CALF-20 Invented at University of Calgary Composed of zinc ions coordinated with triazolate and oxalate ligands, forming a three-dimensional porous structure. Selectively adsorbs carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) over water. Very stable under harsh conditions, including exposure to steam, wet acid gases, and prolonged contact with direct flue gas from natural gas combustion. Robust and scalable Surface area: 528 m 2 per gram (Langmuir), 38% void volume, Selective CO 2 physisorption: CO 2 uptake 4.07 mmol g−1 at 1.2 bar and 293 K. Industrial CO 2 capture and storage, with potential applications in sectors such as cement production. [ 29 ] [ 30 ] [ 31 ] [ 8 ] Basolite A520 Surface area of 1300 m 2 per gram (N 2 BET) Natural gas storage Large scale production by BASF [ 8 ] Covalent organic framework (COF) [ edit ] Main article: Covalent organic framework COFs are a type of porous materials characterized by their non-metallic composition. These materials are formed by arranging pre-designed organic-molecular building units into a well-ordered and repetitive structure through reversible covalent bonds. [ 6 ] COFs exhibit a highly tunable structure, high crystallinity, chemical stability, and versatile functionalization. [ 32 ] What sets COFs apart is that their framework structure is solely determined by the choice of monomers. This unique characteristic allows COFs to be fully pre-designed. The resulting structural predictability is rarely achievable with traditional polymers and other molecular frameworks. [ 6 ] Compared to MOFs, COFs tend to have greater chemical and thermal stability. This stability arises from their structure, which consists of light elements linked by strong covalent bonds. [ 33 ] COFs are also suitable for water harvesting from air. Experiments used COF as exemplars for how to determine a priori the onset of water harvesting from a given porous framework structure. [ 32 ] A selection of notable COFs, their key characteristics and applications. These COFs are notable based on the timing of their discovery (e.g. being the first one) or because of full scale applications. Name Key characteristics Possible applications (mostly laboratory; few large-scale) Source COF-108 The first three-dimensional COF Highly ordered and crystalline structure. Constructed from tetrahedral boron nodes and pyridine-based linkers Extensive 3D porous network. Significant surface area and open channels Hydrogen storage [ 34 ] [ 33 ] COF-999 Its structure features olefin linkages Post-synthetically modified with covalently attached amine initiators, leading to the formation of polyamines within its pores. COF-999 allows for CO 2 desorption at a relatively low regeneration temperature of 60 °C, which is advantageous for energy efficiency. Carbon dioxide direct air capture (DAC) from ambient air Small-scale tests in open air at Berkeley, California. [ 35 ] Hydrogen-bonded organic framework (HOF) [ edit ] Main article: Hydrogen-bonded organic framework HOFs are constructed by assembling organic units, comprising both pure organic and metal-containing organic moieties, through robust hydrogen bonding interactions. The stability of these frameworks can be further reinforced through framework interpenetration and various weak intermolecular interactions, including π-π interactions , van der Waals interactions , etc. [ 6 ] HOFs are formed through hydrogen bonding, which is inherently weaker and more reversible compared to coordination or covalent bonds (i.e. the type of bonds prevalent in MOFs and COFs, respectively). Because of the hydrogen bonding connections, HOFs exhibit advantages compared to MOFs and COFs such as solution processability, facile synthesis and characterization. HOFs also have the ability to undergo easy healing and purification through simple recrystallization. [ 6 ] They also show easy regeneration. [ 4 ] On the other hand, it is harder to synthesize robust and porous HOFs than MOFs and COFs. This is because the H-bonding energy of the HOFs is weaker than the bonds in MOFs and COFs. [ 4 ] Physical and chemical properties [ edit ] Further information: Metal–organic framework § Mechanical properties , and Covalent organic framework § Properties The design of reticular materials can be tailored to specific needs through the choice of nodes (metal ions, organic molecules) and linkers (organic ligands, covalent bonds). This tunability allows precise control over physical, chemical, and mechanical properties. [ 1 ] To compare reticular materials, important properties include their surface area (unit: m 2 /g) (measured as N 2 BET area or as Langmuir surface area), density (unit: g/cm 3 ), specific pore volume (unit: cm 3 /g), and pore size (unit: Å). [ 8 ] The exact values vary but what all reticular materials have in common are very high porosity and surface area. In an attempt to provide analogies that laypersons can understand: “one gram of these new MOFs has the surface area of several football fields”. [ 12 ] MOFs can have surface areas of 1000–10,000 m 2 per gram of material. [ 13 ] HOFs fall in the lower third of that range: the highest BET surface area for HOFs was reported to be 3,400 m 2 per gram. [ 4 ] To give some example figures: The two COFs termed COF-1 and COF-5 have pore sizes ranging from 7 to 27 angstroms; thermal stability to temperatures up to 500° to 600°C; and surface areas of 711 and 1590 m 2 per gram of material, respectively. [ 15 ] Synthesis [ edit ] Further information: Metal–organic_framework § Synthesis , Covalent organic framework § Synthetic chemistry , and Hydrogen-bonded organic framework § Synthetic m