Introduction to quantum mechanics - Wikipedia Jump to content From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Non-mathematical introduction This article is a nontechnical introduction to the subject. For the main encyclopedia article, see Quantum mechanics . For the book by David J. Griffiths, see Introduction to Quantum Mechanics (book) . Part of a series of articles about Quantum mechanics i ℏ d d t | Ψ ⟩ = H ^ | Ψ ⟩ {\displaystyle i\hbar {\frac {d}{dt}}|\Psi \rangle ={\hat {H}}|\Psi \rangle } Schrödinger equation Introduction Glossary History Background Classical mechanics Old quantum theory Interference Fundamentals Bra–ket notation Complementarity Entanglement Energy level Hamiltonian Measurement Nonlocality Quantum number State Superposition Symmetry Tunnelling Uncertainty Wave function Collapse Experiments Bell's inequality Davisson – Germer Double-slit Elitzur – Vaidman Franck – Hertz Mach – Zehnder Delayed-choice quantum eraser Stern – Gerlach Rutherford Formulations Overview Heisenberg Interaction Matrix Phase-space Schrödinger Sum-over-histories (path integral) Equations Dirac Klein–Gordon Pauli Rydberg Schrödinger Interpretations Bayesian Consciousness causes collapse Consistent histories Copenhagen de Broglie–Bohm Ensemble Hidden-variable Many-worlds Objective-collapse Quantum logic Superdeterminism Relational Transactional Advanced topics Relativistic quantum mechanics Quantum field theory Quantum information science Quantum computing Quantum chaos Decoherence EPR paradox Density matrix Scattering theory Quantum statistical mechanics Quantum machine learning v t e Quantum mechanics is the study of matter and matter's interactions with energy on the scale of atomic and subatomic particles . By contrast, classical physics explains matter and energy only on a scale familiar to human experience, including the behavior of astronomical bodies such as the Moon. Classical physics is still used in much of modern science and technology. However, towards the end of the 19th century, scientists discovered phenomena in both the large ( macro ) and the small ( micro ) worlds that classical physics could not explain. [ 1 ] The desire to resolve inconsistencies between observed phenomena and classical theory led to a revolution in physics, a shift in the original scientific paradigm : [ 2 ] the development of quantum mechanics . Many aspects of quantum mechanics yield unexpected results, defying expectations and deemed counterintuitive. [ 3 ] These aspects can seem paradoxical as they map behaviors quite differently from those seen at larger scales. In the words of quantum physicist Richard Feynman , quantum mechanics deals with "nature as she is—absurd". [ 4 ] Features of quantum mechanics often defy simple explanations in everyday language. One example of this is the uncertainty principle —precise measurements of position cannot be combined with precise measurements of velocity. Another example is entanglement —a measurement made on one particle (such as an electron that is measured to have spin 'up') will correlate with a measurement on a second particle (an electron will be found to have spin 'down') if the two particles have a shared history. This will apply even if it is impossible for the result of the first measurement to have been transmitted to the second particle before the second measurement takes place. Quantum mechanics helps people understand chemistry because it explains how atoms interact with each other and form molecules . Many remarkable phenomena can be explained using quantum mechanics, like superfluidity . For example, if liquid helium cooled to a temperature near absolute zero is placed in a container, it spontaneously flows up and over the rim of its container; this is an effect that cannot be explained by classical physics. History [ edit ] Main article: History of quantum mechanics James C. Maxwell 's unification of the equations governing electricity, magnetism, and light in the late 19th century led to experiments on the interaction of light and matter. Some of these experiments had aspects that could not be explained until quantum mechanics emerged in the early part of the 20th century. [ 5 ] Evidence of quanta from the photoelectric effect [ edit ] Main article: Photoelectric effect The seeds of the quantum revolution appear in the discovery by J.J. Thomson in 1897 that cathode rays were not continuous but "corpuscles" ( electrons ). Electrons had been named just six years earlier as part of the emerging theory of atoms . In 1900, Max Planck , unconvinced by the atomic theory , discovered that he needed discrete entities like atoms or electrons to explain black-body radiation . [ 6 ] Black-body radiation intensity vs color and temperature. The rainbow bar represents visible light; 5000 K objects are "white hot" by mixing differing colors of visible light. To the right is the invisible infrared. Classical theory (black curve for 5000 K) fails to predict the colors; the other curves are correctly predicted by quantum theories. Very hot – red hot or white hot – objects look similar when heated to the same temperature. This look results from a common curve of light intensity at different frequencies (colors), which is called black-body radiation. White-hot objects have intensity across many colors in the visible range. The lowest frequencies above visible colors are infrared light , which also gives off heat. Continuous wave theories of light and matter cannot explain the black-body radiation curve. Planck spread the heat energy among individual "oscillators" of an undefined character but with discrete energy capacity; this model explained black-body radiation. At the time, electrons, atoms, and discrete oscillators were all exotic ideas to explain exotic phenomena. But in 1905, Albert Einstein proposed that light was also corpuscular, consisting of "energy quanta", in contradiction to the established science of light as a continuous wave, stretching back a hundred years to Thomas Young 's work on diffraction . Einstein's revolutionary proposal started by reanalyzing Planck's black-body theory, arriving at the same conclusions by using the new "energy quanta". Einstein then showed how energy quanta connected to Thomson's electron. In 1902, Philipp Lenard directed light from an arc lamp onto freshly cleaned metal plates housed in an evacuated glass tube. He measured the electric current coming off the metal plate at higher and lower intensities of light and for different metals. Lenard showed that the amount of current – the number of electrons – depended on the intensity of the light, but that the velocity of these electrons did not depend on intensity. This is the photoelectric effect . The continuous wave theories of the time predicted that more light intensity would accelerate the same amount of current to a higher velocity, contrary to this experiment. Einstein's energy quanta explained the volume increase: one electron is ejected for each quantum; more quanta mean more electrons. [ 6 ] : 23 Einstein then predicted that the electron velocity would increase in direct proportion to the light frequency above a fixed value that depended upon the metal. Here, the idea is that energy in energy-quanta depends upon the light frequency; the energy transferred to the electron comes in proportion to the light frequency. The type of metal gives a barrier , the fixed value, that the electrons must climb over to exit their atoms, to be emitted from the metal surface and be measured. Ten years elapsed before Millikan's definitive experiment [ 7 ] verified Einstein's prediction. During that time, many scientists rejected the revolutionary idea of quanta. [ 8 ] But Planck's and Einstein's concept was in the air and soon began to affect other physics and quantum theories. Quantization of bound electrons in atoms [ edit ] Main articles: Atomic theory , Bohr atom , and Bohr-Sommerfeld model Further information: Spectral lines Experiments with light and matter in the late 1800s uncovered a reproducible but puzzling regularity. When light was shown through purified gases, certain frequencies (colors) did not pass. These dark absorption 'lines' followed a distinctive pattern: the gaps between the lines decreased steadily. By 1889, the Rydberg formula predicted the lines for hydrogen gas using only a constant number and the integers to index the lines. [ 5 ] : v1:376 The origin of this regularity was unknown. Solving this mystery would eventually become the first major step toward quantum mechanics. Throughout the 19th century, evidence grew for the atomic nature of matter. With Thomson's discovery of the electron in 1897, scientists began the search for a model of the interior of the atom. Thomson proposed that negative electrons were swimming in a pool of positive charge . Between 1908 and 1911, Rutherford showed that the positive part was only 1/3000th of the diameter of the atom. [ 6 ] : 26 Models of "planetary" electrons orbiting a nuclear "Sun" were proposed, but cannot explain why the electron does not simply fall into the positive charge. In 1913, Niels Bohr and Ernest Rutherford connected the new atomic models to the mystery of the Rydberg formula: the orbital radius of electrons was constrained and the resulting energy differences matched the energy differences in the absorption lines. This meant that absorption and emission of light from atoms were energy quantized: only specific energies that matched the difference in orbital energy would be emitted or absorbed. [ 6 ] : 31 Trading one mystery – the regular pattern of the Rydberg formula – for another mystery – constraints on electron orbits – might not seem like a big advance, but the new atom model summarized many other experimental findings. The quantization of the photoelectric effect and now the quantization of the electron orbits set the stage for the final revolution. Throughout the first and modern eras of quantum mechanics, the concept that classical mechanics must be valid macroscopically constrained possible quantum models. This concept was formalized by Bohr in 1923 as the correspondence principle . It requires quantum theory to converge to classical limits. [ 9 ] : 29 A related concept is Ehrenfest's theorem , which shows that the average values obtained from quantum mechanics (e.g. position and momentum) obey classical laws. [ 10 ] Quantization of spin [ edit ] Main article: Stern–Gerlach experiment Stern–Gerlach experiment : Silver atoms travelling through an inhomogeneous magnetic field, and being deflected up or down depending on their spin; (1) furnace, (2) beam of silver atoms, (3) inhomogeneous magnetic field, (4) classically expected result, (5) observed result In 1922, Otto Stern and Walther Gerlach demonstrated that the magnetic properties of silver atoms defy classical explanation, the work contributing to Stern’s 1943 Nobel Prize in Physics . They fired a beam of silver atoms through a magnetic field. According to classical physics, the atoms should have emerged in a spray, with a continuous range of directions. Instead, the beam separated into two, and only two, diverging streams of atoms. [ 11 ] Unlike the other quantum effects known at the time, this striking result involves the state of a single atom. [ 5 ] : v2:130 In 1927, Thomas Erwin Phipps and John Bellamy Taylor [ de ] obtained a similar, but less pronounced effect using hydrogen atoms in their ground state , thereby eliminating any doubts that may have been caused by the use of silver atoms. [ 12 ] In 1924, Wolfgang Pauli called it "two-valuedness not describable classically" and associated it with electrons in the outermost shell. [ 13 ] The experiments lead to formulation of its theory described to arise from spin of the electron in 1925, by Samuel Goudsmit and George Uhlenbeck , under the advice of Paul Ehrenfest . [ 14 ] Quantization of matter [ edit ] Main articles: Matter wave and Schrödinger equation In 1924 Louis de Broglie proposed [ 15 ] that electrons in an atom are constrained not in "orbits" but as standing waves. In detail his solution did not work, but his hypothesis – that the electron "corpuscle" moves in the atom as a wave – spurred Erwin Schrödinger to develop a wave equation for electrons; when applied to hydrogen the Rydberg formula was accurately reproduced. [ 6 ] : 65 Example original electron diffraction photograph from the laboratory of G. P. Thomson, recorded 1925–1927 Max Born 's 1924 paper "Zur Quantenmechanik" was the first use of the words "quantum mechanics" in print. [ 16 ] [ 17 ] His later work included developing quantum collision models; in a footnote to a 1926 paper he proposed the Born rule connecting theoretical models to experiment. [ 18 ] In 1927 at Bell Labs, Clinton Davisson and Lester Germer fired slow-moving electrons at a crystalline nickel target which showed a diffraction pattern [ 19 ] [ 20 ] [ 21 ] [ 22 ] indicating wave nature of electron whose theory was fully explained by Hans Bethe . [ 23 ] A similar experiment by George Paget Thomson and Alexander Reid, firing electrons at thin celluloid foils and later metal films, observing rings, independently discovered matter wave nature of electrons. [ 24 ] Further developments [ edit ] In 1928 Paul Dirac published his relativistic wave equation simultaneously incorporating relativity , predicting anti-matter , and providing a complete theory for the Stern–Gerlach result. [ 6 ] : 131 These successes launched a new fundamental understanding of our world at small scale: quantum mechanics . Planck and Einstein started the revolution with quanta that broke down the continuous models of matter and light. Twenty years later "corpuscles" like electrons came to be modeled as continuous waves. This result came to be called wave-particle duality, one iconic idea along with the uncertainty principle that sets quantum mechanics apart from older models of physics. Quantum radiation, quantum fields [ edit ] Main article: History of quantum field theory In 1923 Compton demonstrated that the Planck-Einstein energy quanta from light also had momentum; three years later the "energy quanta" got a new name " photon ". [ 25 ] Despite its role in almost all stages of the quantum revolution, no explicit model for light quanta existed until 1927 when Paul Dirac began work on a quantum theory of radiation [ 26 ] that became quantum electrodynamics . Over the following decades this work evolved into quantum field theory , the basis for modern quantum optics and particle physics . Wave–particle duality [ edit ] Main articles: Wave–particle duality and Double-slit experiment The concept of wave–particle duality says that neither the classical concept of "particle" nor of "wave" can fully describe the behavior of quantum-scale objects, either photons or matter. Wave–particle duality is an example of the principle of complementarity in quantum physics. [ 27 ] [ 28 ] [ 29 ] [ 30 ] [ 31 ] An elegant example of wave-particle duality is the double-slit experiment. The diffraction pattern produced when light is shone through one slit (top) and the interference pattern produced by two slits (bottom). Both patterns show oscillations due to the wave nature of light. The double slit pattern is more dramatic. The double-slit experiment for a classical particle, a wave, and a quantum particle demonstrating wave-particle duality In the double-slit experiment, as originally performed by Thomas Young in 1803, [ 32 ] and then Augustin Fresnel a decade later, [ 32 ] a beam of light is directed through two narrow, closely spaced slits, producing an interference pattern of light and dark bands on a screen. The same behavior can be demonstrated in water waves: the double-slit experiment was seen as a demonstration of the wave nature of light. Variations of the double-slit experiment have been performed using electrons, atoms, and even large molecules, [ 33 ] [ 34 ] and the same type of interference pattern is seen. Thus it has been demonstrated that all matter possesses wave characteristics. If the source intensity is turned down, the same interference pattern will slowly build up, one "count" or particle (e.g. photon or electron) at a time. The quantum system acts as a wave when passing through the double slits, but as a particle when it is detected. This is a typical feature of quantum complementarity: a quantum system acts as a wave in an experiment to measure its wave-like properties, and like a particle in an experiment to measure its particle-like properties. The point on the detector screen where any individual particle shows up is the result of a random process. However, the distribution pattern of many individual particles mimics the diffraction pattern produced by waves. Uncertainty principle [ edit ] Main article: Uncertainty principle Werner Heisenberg at the age of 26. Heisenberg won the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1932 for the work he did in the late 1920s. [ 35 ] Suppose it is desired to measure the position and speed of an object—for example, a car going through a radar speed trap. It can be assumed that the car has a definite position and speed at a particular moment in time. How accurately these values can be measured depends on the quality of the measuring equipment. If the precision of the measuring equipment is improved, it provides a result closer to the true value. It might be assumed that the speed of the car and its position could be operationally defined and measured simultaneously, as precisely as might be desired. In 1927, Heisenberg proved that this last assumption is not correct. [ 36 ] Quantum mechanics shows that certain pairs of physical properties, for example, position and speed, cannot be simultaneously measured, nor defined in operational terms, to arbitrary precision: the more precisely one property is measured, or defined in operational terms, the less precisely can the other be thus treated. This statement is known as the uncertainty principle . The uncertainty principle is not only a statement about the accuracy of our measuring equipment but, more deeply, is about the conceptual nature of the measured quantities—the assumption that the car had simultaneously defined position and speed does not work in quantum mechanics. On a scale of cars and people, these uncertainties are negligible, but when dealing with atoms and electrons they become critical. [ 37 ] Heisenberg gave, as an illustration, the measurement of the position and momentum of an electron using a photon of light. In measuring the electron's position, the higher the frequency of the photon, the more accurate is the measurement of the position of the impact of the photon with the electron, but the greater is the disturbance of the electron. This is because from the impact with the photon, the electron absorbs a random amount of energy, rendering the measurement obtained of its momentum increasingly uncertain, for one is necessarily measuring its post-impact disturbed momentum from the collision products and not its original momentum (momentum which should be simultaneously measured with position). With a photon of lower frequency, the disturbance (and hence uncertainty) in the momentum is less, but so is the accuracy of the measurement of the position of the impact. [ 38 ] At the heart of the uncertainty principle is a fact that for any mathematical analysis in the position and velocity domains, achieving a sharper (more precise) curve in the position domain can only be done at the expense of a more gradual (less precise) curve in the speed domain, and vice versa. More sharpness in the position domain requires contributions from more frequencies in the speed domain to create the narrower curve, and vice versa. It is a fundamental tradeoff inherent in any such related or complementary measurements, but is only really noticeable at the smallest (Planck) scale, near the size of elementary particles . The uncertainty principle shows