Mathematics education - Wikipedia Jump to content From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Teaching, learning, and scholarly research in mathematics A child calculating with his fingers (2006) Educational research Disciplines Curriculum studies Curriculum Instruction Education sciences Evaluation History Philosophy Psychology ( school ) Technology International education School counseling Special education Gifted education Female education Religious education Teacher education Teaching method Curricular domains Arts Business Computing Early childhood Engineering Language Literacy Mathematics Performing arts Science Social science Technology Vocational Methods Case method Conversation analysis Discourse analysis Evidence-based Factor analysis Factorial experiment Focus group Learning theory Meta-analysis Multivariate statistics Participant observation Reform v t e In contemporary education , mathematics education (known in Europe as the didactics or pedagogy of mathematics ) is the practice of teaching , learning , and carrying out scholarly research into the transfer of mathematical knowledge. Although research into mathematics education is primarily concerned with the tools, methods, and approaches that facilitate practice or the study of practice, it also covers an extensive field of study encompassing a variety of different concepts, theories and methods. National and international organisations regularly hold conferences and publish literature in order to improve mathematics education. Objectives [ edit ] Boy doing sums, Guinea-Bissau, 1974 At different times and in different cultures and countries, mathematics education has attempted to achieve a variety of different objectives. These objectives have included: The teaching and learning of basic numeracy skills to all students [ 1 ] The teaching of practical mathematics ( arithmetic , elementary algebra , plane and solid geometry , trigonometry , probability , statistics ) to most students, to equip them to follow a trade or craft and to understand mathematics commonly used in news and the Internet (such as percentages , charts , probability , and statistics ) The teaching of abstract mathematical concepts (such as set and function ) at an early age The teaching of selected areas of mathematics (such as Euclidean geometry ) [ 2 ] as an example of an axiomatic system [ 3 ] and a model of deductive reasoning The teaching of selected areas of mathematics (such as calculus ) as an example of the intellectual achievements of the modern world The teaching of advanced mathematics to those students who wish to follow a career in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields The teaching of heuristics [ 4 ] and other problem-solving strategies to solve non-routine problems The teaching of mathematics in social sciences and actuarial sciences , as well as in some selected arts under liberal arts education in liberal arts colleges or universities Methods [ edit ] See also: Financial literacy curriculum , List of open-source software for mathematics , and List of mathematical art software The method or methods used in any particular context are largely determined by the objectives that the relevant educational system is trying to achieve. Methods of teaching mathematics include the following: 3D sketch of desk cubicles to get computers in the classroom for computer-based mathematics , CAD , CAM , BIM , computer-aided engineering , computer programming , animation software , science software applications , and more. Games can motivate students to improve skills that are usually learned by rote. In "Number Bingo," players roll 3 dice, then perform basic mathematical operations on those numbers to get a new number, which they cover on the board trying to cover 4 squares in a row. This game was played at a "Discovery Day" organized by Big Brother Mouse in Laos. Computer-based math : an approach based on the use of mathematical software as the primary tool of computation. Computer-based mathematics education : involves the use of computers to teach mathematics. Mobile applications have also been developed to help students learn mathematics. [ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] Classical education : the teaching of mathematics within the quadrivium , part of the classical education curriculum of the Middle Ages , which was typically based on Euclid's Elements taught as a paradigm of deductive reasoning . [ 8 ] Conventional approach : the gradual and systematic guiding through the hierarchy of mathematical notions, ideas and techniques. Starts with arithmetic and is followed by Euclidean geometry and elementary algebra taught concurrently. Requires the instructor to be well informed about elementary mathematics since didactic and curriculum decisions are often dictated by the logic of the subject rather than pedagogical considerations. Other methods emerge by emphasizing some aspects of this approach. Relational approach : uses class topics to solve everyday problems and relates the topic to current events. [ 9 ] This approach focuses on the many uses of mathematics and helps students understand why they need to know it as well as helps them to apply mathematics to real-world situations outside of the classroom. Historical method : teaching the development of mathematics within a historical, social, and cultural context. Proponents argue it provides more human interest than the conventional approach. [ 10 ] Discovery math : a constructivist method of teaching ( discovery learning ) mathematics which centres around problem-based or inquiry-based learning, with the use of open-ended questions and manipulative tools. [ 11 ] This type of mathematics education was implemented in various parts of Canada beginning in 2005. [ 12 ] Discovery-based mathematics is at the forefront of the Canadian " math wars " debate with many criticizing it for declining math scores. New Math : a method of teaching mathematics which focuses on abstract concepts such as set theory , functions , and bases other than ten. Adopted in the US as a response to the challenge of early Soviet technical superiority in space, it began to be challenged in the late 1960s. One of the most influential critiques of the New Math was Morris Kline 's 1973 book Why Johnny Can't Add . The New Math method was the topic of one of Tom Lehrer 's most popular parody songs, with his introductory remarks to the song: "...in the new approach, as you know, the important thing is to understand what you're doing, rather than to get the right answer." Recreational mathematics : mathematical problems that are fun can motivate students to learn mathematics and can increase their enjoyment of mathematics. [ 13 ] Standards-based mathematics : a vision for pre-college mathematics education in the United States and Canada , focused on deepening student understanding of mathematical ideas and procedures, and formalized by the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics which created the Principles and Standards for School Mathematics . Mastery : an approach in which most students are expected to achieve a high level of competence before progressing. Problem solving : the cultivation of mathematical ingenuity, creativity , and heuristic thinking by setting students open-ended, unusual, and sometimes unsolved problems . The problems can range from simple word problems to problems from international mathematics competitions such as the International Mathematical Olympiad . Problem-solving is used as a means to build new mathematical knowledge, typically by building on students' prior understandings. Exercises : the reinforcement of mathematical skills by completing large numbers of exercises of a similar type, such as adding simple fractions or solving quadratic equations . Rote learning : the teaching of mathematical results, definitions and concepts by repetition and memorisation typically without meaning or supported by mathematical reasoning . A derisory term is drill and kill . In traditional education , rote learning is used to teach multiplication tables , definitions, formulas, and other aspects of mathematics. Math walk : a walk where experience of perceived objects and scenes is translated into mathematical language. Content and age levels [ edit ] A mathematics lecture at Aalto University School of Science and Technology Different levels of mathematics are taught at different ages and in somewhat different sequences in different countries. Sometimes a class may be taught at an earlier age than typical as a special or honors class . Elementary mathematics in most countries is taught similarly, though there are differences. Most countries tend to cover fewer topics in greater depth than in the United States. [ 14 ] During the primary school years, children learn about whole numbers and arithmetic, including addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division. [ 15 ] Comparisons and measurement are taught, in both numeric and pictorial form, as well as fractions and proportionality , patterns, and various topics related to geometry. [ 16 ] At high school level in most of the US, algebra , geometry , and analysis ( pre-calculus and calculus ) are taught as separate courses in different years. On the other hand, in most other countries (and in a few US states), mathematics is taught as an integrated subject, with topics from all branches of mathematics studied every year; students thus follow a pre-defined course sequence – encompassing different topics – rather than choosing courses à la carte as in the United States. Even in these cases, however, several "mathematics" options may be offered, selected based on the student's intended studies post high school.
(In South Africa, for example, the options are Mathematics, Mathematical Literacy and Technical Mathematics.)
Thus, a science-oriented curriculum typically overlaps the first year of university mathematics, and includes differential calculus and trigonometry at age 16–17 and integral calculus , complex numbers , analytic geometry , exponential and logarithmic functions , and infinite series in their final year of secondary school; Probability and statistics are similarly often taught. At college and university level, science and engineering students will be required to take multivariable calculus , differential equations , and linear algebra ; at several US colleges, the minor or AS in mathematics substantively comprises these courses. Mathematics majors study additional areas of pure mathematics —and often applied mathematics—with the requirement of specified advanced courses in analysis and modern algebra . Other topics in pure mathematics include differential geometry , set theory , and topology . Applied mathematics may be taken as a major subject in its own right, covering partial differential equations , optimization , and numerical analysis among other topics. Courses here are also taught within other programs: for example, civil engineers may be required to study fluid mechanics , [ 17 ] and "math for computer science" might include graph theory , permutation , probability, and formal mathematical proofs . [ 18 ] Pure and applied math degrees often include modules in probability theory or mathematical statistics , as well as stochastic processes . Physics , especially theoretical , is mathematics-intensive, substantively overlapping both pure and applied math. Coverage in other programs will vary. Business mathematics is usually limited to introductory calculus and (sometimes) matrix calculations; business majors often also take a parallel course in statistics and probability. Additional to these topics, economics programs typically cover optimization , often differential equations and linear algebra , and sometimes analysis; statistics is similarly extended, underpinning econometrics . The discipline of Management Science formalizes the use of mathematics and statistics in business. Social science curricula require statistics also, often complemented by major-specific quantitative research courses. Students in the humanities and liberal arts may be offered a course in " finite math" , "contemporary mathematics," "mathematics for the liberal arts," or "quantitative reasoning," which may include topics such as set theory and mathematical logic , and applications of mathematics to other fields. [ 19 ] Mathematics courses have low rates of course success relative to other fields of study, [ 20 ] and students at US colleges and universities may be required to retake high school mathematics courses through remedial education programs. Standards [ edit ] Throughout most of history, standards for mathematics education were set locally, by individual schools or teachers, depending on the levels of achievement that were relevant to, realistic for, and considered socially appropriate for their pupils. In modern times, there has been a move towards regional or national standards, usually under the umbrella of a wider standard school curriculum. In England , for example, standards for mathematics education are set as part of the National Curriculum for England, [ 21 ] while Scotland maintains its own educational system. Many other countries have centralized ministries which set national standards or curricula, and sometimes even textbooks. Ma (2000) summarized the research of others who found, based on nationwide data, that students with higher scores on standardized mathematics tests had taken more mathematics courses in high school. This led some states to require three years of mathematics instead of two. But because this requirement was often met by taking another lower-level mathematics course, the additional courses had a "diluted" effect in raising achievement levels. [ 22 ] In North America, the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics (NCTM) published the Principles and Standards for School Mathematics in 2000 for the United States and Canada, which boosted the trend towards reform mathematics . In 2006, the NCTM released Curriculum Focal Points , which recommend the most important mathematical topics for each grade level through grade 8. However, these standards were guidelines to implement as American states and Canadian provinces chose. In 2010, the National Governors Association Center for Best Practices and the Council of Chief State School Officers published the Common Core State Standards for US states, which were subsequently adopted by most states. Adoption of the Common Core State Standards in mathematics is at the discretion of each state, and is not mandated by the federal government. [ 23 ] "States routinely review their academic standards and may choose to change or add onto the standards to best meet the needs of their students." [ 24 ] The NCTM has state affiliates that have different education standards at the state level. For example, Missouri has the Missouri Council of Teachers of Mathematics (MCTM) which has its pillars and standards of education listed on its website. The MCTM also offers membership opportunities to teachers and future teachers so that they can stay up to date on the changes in math educational standards. [ 25 ] The Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA), created by the Organisation for the Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), is a global program studying the reading, science, and mathematics abilities of 15-year-old students. [ 26 ] The first assessment was conducted in the year 2000 with 43 countries participating. [ 27 ] PISA has repeated this assessment every three years to provide comparable data, helping to guide global education to better prepare youth for future economies. There have been many ramifications following the results of triennial PISA assessments due to implicit and explicit responses of stakeholders, which have led to education reform and policy change. [ 27 ] [ 28 ] [ 11 ] Research [ edit ] Paul Ernest proposed, in a tentative and incomplete way, some primary and secondary objects of study of research in mathematics education. While the secondary objects come after the primary objects, Ernest claimed that they are "important too, and should not be neglected." [ 29 ] These primary objects of study are The nature of mathematics and school mathematical knowledge The learning of mathematics The aims and goals of mathematics teaching and schooling The teaching of mathematics, including the methods and approaches involved The full range of texts, materials, aids and electronic resources employed The human and social contexts of mathematics learning/teaching in all their complexity The interaction and relationships between all of the above factors. The secondary objects of study are The nature of mathematics education knowledge: its concepts, theories, results, literature, aims and function The nature of mathematics education research: its epistemology, theoretical bases, criteria, methodology, methods, outcomes and goals Mathematics education teaching and learning in teacher education, including practice, technique, theory and research The social institutions of mathematics education: the persons, locations, institutions (universities, colleges, research centers), conferences, organizations, networks, journals, etc. and their relationships with its overall social or societal contexts. According to Hiebert and Grouws, "Robust, useful theories of classroom teaching do not yet exist." [ 30 ] However, there are useful theories on how children learn mathematics, and much research has been conducted in recent decades to explore how these theories can be applied to teaching. The following results are examples of some of the current findings in the field of mathematics education. Important results [ edit ] One of the strongest results in recent research is that the most important feature of effective teaching is giving students "the opportunity to learn". Teachers can set expectations, times, kinds of tasks, questions, acceptable answers, and types of discussions that will influence students' opportunities to learn. This must involve both skill efficiency and conceptual understanding. [ 30 ] Conceptual understanding [ edit ] Source: [ 30 ] Two of the most important features of teaching in the promotion of conceptual understanding times are attending explicitly to concepts and allowing students to struggle with important mathematics. Both of these features have been confirmed through a wide variety of studies. Explicit attention to concepts involves making connections between facts, procedures, and ideas. (This is often seen as one of the strong points in mathematics teaching in East Asian countries, where teachers typically devote about half of their time to making connections. At the other extreme is the US, where essentially no connections are made in school classrooms. [ 31 ] ) These connections can be made through explanation of the meaning of a procedure, questions comparing strategies and solutions of problems, noticing how one problem is a special case of another, reminding students of the main point, discussing how lessons connect, and so on. Deliberate, productive struggle with mathematical ideas refers to the fact that when students exert effort with important mathematical ideas, even if this struggle initially involves confusion and errors, the result is greater learning. This is true whether the struggle is due to intentionally challenging, well-implemented teaching, or unintentionally confusing, faulty teaching. Formative assessment [ edit ] Formative assessment is both the best and cheapest way to boost student achievement, student engagement, and teacher professional satisfaction. Results surpass those of reducing class size or increasing teachers' content knowledge. Effective assessment is based on clarifying what students should know, creating appropriate activities to obtain the evidence needed, giving good feedback, encouraging students to take control of their learning and letting students be 