Silk Road - Wikipedia Jump to content From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Historical network of Eurasian trade routes For other uses, see Silk Road (disambiguation) . "Silk Route" redirects here. For other uses, see Silk Route (disambiguation) . "Silk Way" redirects here. For the cargo airlines based in Azerbaijan , see Silk Way Airlines and Silk Way West Airlines . Silk Road Main routes of the Silk Road Route information Time period c. 114 BCE – c. 1450 CE ; 2140 years ago UNESCO World Heritage Site Official name Silk Roads: the Routes Network of Chang'an-Tianshan Corridor Type Cultural Criteria ii, iii, v, vi Designated 2014 (38th session ) Reference no. 1442 Region Asia-Pacific UNESCO World Heritage Site Official name Silk Roads: Zarafshan-Karakum Corridor Type Cultural Criteria ii, iii, v Designated 2023 (45th session ) Reference no. 1675 Region Asia-Pacific Chinese name Traditional Chinese 絲綢之路 Simplified Chinese 丝绸之路 Transcriptions Standard Mandarin Hanyu Pinyin Sīchóu zhī lù Wade–Giles Ssu 1 ch #x 02 BB;ou 1 chih 1 lu 4 The Silk Road [ a ] was a network of Asian trade routes active from the second century BCE until the mid-15th century. [ 1 ] Spanning over 6,400 km (4,000 mi) on land, it played a central role in facilitating economic, cultural, political, and religious interactions between the Eastern and Western worlds . [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] The name "Silk Road" was coined in the late 19th century, but some 20th- and 21st-century historians instead prefer the term Silk Routes , on the grounds that it more accurately describes the intricate web of land and sea routes connecting Central , East , South , Southeast , and West Asia as well as East Africa and Southern Europe . [ 1 ] In fact, some scholars [ who? ] criticise or even dismiss the idea of silk roads and call for a new definition or alternate term. According to them [ who? ] , the literature using this term has "privileged the sedentary and literate empires at either end of Eurasia " [ why? ] thereby ignoring the contributions of steppe nomads. In addition, the classic definition sidelines prominent civilisations such as India and Iran . [ 5 ] The Silk Road derives its name from the highly lucrative trade of silk textiles that were primarily produced in China . The network began with the expansion of the Han dynasty (202 BCE – 220 CE) into Central Asia around 114 BCE, through the missions and explorations of the Chinese imperial envoy Zhang Qian , [ 6 ] which brought the region under unified control . The Chinese took great interest in the security of their trade products, and extended the Great Wall of China to ensure the protection of the trade route. [ 7 ] The Parthian Empire provided a vital bridge connecting the network to the Mediterranean . Meanwhile, the rise of the Roman Empire in the west further established the western terminus of the interconnected trade system. [ 8 ] By the first century CE, Chinese silk was widely sought after in Rome , Egypt , and Greece . [ 1 ] Other lucrative commodities from the East included tea, dyes, perfumes, and porcelain ; among Western exports were horses, camels, honey, wine, and gold. Aside from generating substantial wealth for emerging mercantile classes, the proliferation of goods such as paper and gunpowder greatly affected the trajectory of political history in several theatres in Eurasia and beyond. The Silk Road was utilized over a period that saw immense political variation across the continent, exemplified by major events such as the Black Death and the Mongol conquests . The network was highly decentralized, and security was sparse: travelers faced constant threats of banditry and nomadic raiders, and long expanses of inhospitable terrain. Few individuals traveled the entire length of the Silk Road, instead relying on a succession of middlemen based at various stopping points along the way. In addition to goods, the network facilitated an unprecedented exchange of religious ( especially Buddhist ), philosophical, and scientific thought, much of which was syncretised by societies along the way. [ 9 ] Likewise, a wide variety of people used the routes. Diseases such as plague also spread along the Silk Road, possibly contributing to the Black Death. [ 10 ] From 1453 onwards, the Ottoman Empire began competing with other gunpowder empires for greater control over the overland routes, which prompted European polities to seek alternatives while themselves gaining leverage over their trade partners. [ 11 ] This marked the beginning of the Age of Discovery , European colonialism , and the further intensification of globalization . In the 21st century, the name "New Silk Road" is used to describe several large infrastructure projects along many of the historic trade routes; among the best known are the Eurasian Land Bridge and the Chinese Belt and Road Initiative (BRI). UNESCO designated the Chang'an-Tianshan corridor of the Silk Road as a World Heritage Site in 2014, and the Zarafshan-Karakum Corridor in 2023. The Fergana-Syrdarya Corridor, the Indian and Iranian portions, and the remaining sites in China remain on the tentative lists. Despite the popular imagination, Silk Road was never a singular east-west trade route that linked China to the Mediterranean, nor was there unrestricted trade before the Mongol Empire. It was a network of routes. Even Marco Polo , often linked to the Silk Road, never used the term despite traveling during a time of Mongol-enabled ease of movement. [ 12 ] Name and contested significance Woven silk textile from Tomb No. 1 at Mawangdui , Changsha , Hunan province, China, dated to the Western Han Era , 2nd century BCE The Silk Road derives its name from the lucrative trade in silk , first developed in China , [ 13 ] [ 14 ] and a major reason for the connection of trade routes into an extensive transcontinental network. [ 15 ] [ 16 ] It derives from the German term Seidenstraße (literally "Silk Road") and was first popularized in 1877 by Ferdinand von Richthofen , who made seven expeditions to China from 1868 to 1872. [ 16 ] [ 17 ] [ 18 ] However, the term itself had been in use in decades prior to that. [ 19 ] The alternative translation "Silk Route" is also used occasionally. Although the term was coined in the 19th century, it did not gain widespread acceptance in academia or popularity among the public until the 20th century. The first book entitled The Silk Road was by Swedish geographer Sven Hedin in 1938. [ 20 ] The use of the term 'Silk Road' is not without its detractors. For instance, Warwick Ball contends that the maritime spice trade with India and Arabia was far more consequential for the economy of the Roman Empire than the silk trade with China , which at sea was conducted mostly through India and on land was handled by numerous intermediaries such as the Sogdians . [ 21 ] Going as far as to call the whole thing a "myth" of modern academia, Ball argues that there was no coherent overland trade system and no free movement of goods from East Asia to the West until the period of the Mongol Empire . He notes that traditional authors discussing east–west trade such as Marco Polo and Edward Gibbon never labelled any route a "silk" one in particular. [ 22 ] William Dalrymple points out that in pre-modern times, maritime travel cost only a fifth of overland transport, [ 23 ] and argues for the pre-13th century primacy of an India-dominated " Golden Road " extending from Rome to Japan. [ 24 ] [ 25 ] The southern stretches of the Silk Road, from Khotan ( Xinjiang ) to Eastern China, were first used for jade and not silk, as long as 5000 BCE , and are still in use for this purpose. The term "Jade Road" would have been more appropriate than "Silk Road" had it not been for the far larger and geographically wider nature of the silk trade; the term is in current use in China. [ 26 ] Routes Further information: Cities along the Silk Road Main routes of the Silk Road on a relief map, with city and region names labeled Two important Silk Road paths from Merv went through Nisa and Sarakhs . They joined together in Masshad , a big religious and trade city in Khurasan . The old road—now a modern highway—went from Masshad to Nishapur, then along the edge of the Dasht-e Kevir desert and the Alborz Mountains , reaching Tehran (called Ray in ancient times). [ 27 ] The Silk Road consisted of several routes. As it extended westwards from the ancient commercial centres of China, the overland, intercontinental Silk Road divided into northern and southern routes bypassing the Taklamakan Desert and Lop Nur . Merchants along these routes were involved in "relay trade" in which goods changed "hands many times before reaching their final destinations". [ 28 ] Northern route Main article: Northern Silk Road The Silk Road in the 1st century The northern route started at Chang'an (now called Xi'an ), an ancient capital of China that was moved further east during the Later Han to Luoyang . The route was defined around the 1st century BCE when Han Wudi put an end to harassment by nomadic tribes. [ 29 ] The northern route travelled northwest through the Chinese province of Gansu from Shaanxi Province and split into three further routes, two of them following the mountain ranges to the north and south of the Taklamakan Desert to rejoin at Kashgar , and the other going north of the Tian Shan mountains through Turpan , Talgar , and Almaty (in what is now southeast Kazakhstan ). The routes split again west of Kashgar, with a southern branch heading down Erkeshtam and the Alay Valley towards Termez (in modern Uzbekistan) and Balkh (Afghanistan), while the other travelled through Torugart Pass to Kokand in the Fergana Valley (in present-day eastern Uzbekistan) and then west across the Karakum Desert . Both routes joined the main southern route before reaching ancient Merv , Turkmenistan. Another branch of the northern route turned northwest past the Aral Sea and north of the Caspian Sea , then and on to the Black Sea. A route for caravans, the northern Silk Road brought to China many goods such as "dates, saffron powder and pistachio nuts from Persia; frankincense , aloes and myrrh from Somalia ; sandalwood from India; glass bottles from Egypt, and other expensive and desirable goods from other parts of the world." [ 30 ] In exchange, the caravans sent back bolts of silk brocade , lacquer-ware , and porcelain . Southern route The southern route or Karakoram route was mainly a single route from China through the Karakoram mountains, where it persists in modern times as the Karakoram Highway , a paved road through Khunjerab Pass that connects Pakistan and China . [ 31 ] It then set off westwards, but with southward spurs so travelers could complete the journey by sea from various points. Crossing the high mountains, it passed through northern Pakistan , over the Hindu Kush mountains, and into Afghanistan , rejoining the northern route near Merv, Turkmenistan . From Merv, it followed a nearly straight line west through mountainous northern Iran , Mesopotamia , and the northern tip of the Syrian Desert to the Levant , where Mediterranean trading ships plied regular routes to Italy , while land routes went either north through Anatolia or south to North Africa . Another branch road travelled from Herat through Susa to Charax Spasinu at the head of the Persian Gulf and across to Petra and on to Alexandria and other eastern Mediterranean ports from where ships carried the cargoes to Rome . [ 31 ] Southwestern route See also: Tea Horse Road The southwestern route is believed to be the Ganges / Brahmaputra Delta, which has been the subject of international interest for over two millennia. Strabo, the 1st-century Roman writer, mentions the deltaic lands: "Regarding merchants who now sail from Egypt ... as far as the Ganges, they are only private citizens." His comments are interesting as Roman beads and other materials are being found at Wari-Bateshwar ruins , the ancient city with roots from much earlier, before the Bronze Age , presently being slowly excavated beside the Old Brahmaputra in Bangladesh. Ptolemy's map of the Ganges Delta , a remarkably accurate effort, showed that his informants knew all about the course of the Brahmaputra River, crossing through the Himalayas then bending westward to its source in Tibet . It is doubtless that this delta was a major international trading center, almost certainly from much earlier than the Common Era. Gemstones and other merchandise from Thailand and Java were traded in the delta and through it. Chinese archaeological writer Bin Yang and some earlier writers and archaeologists, such as Janice Stargardt, strongly suggest this route of international trade as Sichuan – Yunnan – Burma – Bangladesh route. According to Bin Yang, especially from the 12th century, the route was used to ship bullion from Yunnan (gold and silver are among the minerals in which Yunnan is rich), through northern Burma, into modern Bangladesh , making use of the ancient route, known as the 'Ledo' route. The emerging evidence of the ancient cities of Bangladesh, in particular Wari-Bateshwar ruins, Mahasthangarh , Bhitagarh , Bikrampur , Egarasindhur, and Sonargaon , are believed to be the international trade centers in this route. [ 32 ] [ 33 ] [ 34 ] Maritime route Main article: Maritime Silk Road Austronesian proto-historic and historic ( Maritime Silk Road ) maritime trade network in Southeast Asia and the Indian Ocean [ 35 ] The Maritime Silk Road or Maritime Silk Route is the maritime section of the historic Silk Road that connected Southeast Asia , East Asia , the Indian subcontinent , the Arabian Peninsula , eastern Africa , and Europe . It began by the 2nd century BCE and flourished until the 15th century CE. [ 36 ] The Maritime Silk Road was primarily established and operated by Austronesian sailors in Southeast Asia who sailed large long-distance ocean-going sewn-plank and lashed-lug trade ships . [ 37 ] : 11 [ 38 ] The route was also utilized by the dhows of the Persian and Arab traders in the Arabian Sea and beyond, [ 37 ] : 13 and the Tamil merchants in South Asia . [ 37 ] : 13 China also started building their own trade ships ( chuán ) and followed the routes in the later period, from the 10th to the 15th centuries CE. [ 39 ] [ 40 ] The network followed the footsteps of older Austronesian maritime jade networks in Southeast Asia, [ 41 ] [ 42 ] [ 43 ] [ 44 ] as well as the maritime spice networks between Southeast Asia and South Asia , and the West Asian maritime networks in the Arabian Sea and beyond, coinciding with these ancient maritime trade roads by the current era. [ 45 ] [ 46 ] [ 47 ] Austronesian thalassocracies controlled the flow of trade in the eastern regions of the Maritime Silk Road, especially the polities around the straits of Malacca and Bangka , the Malay Peninsula , and the Mekong Delta ; through which passed the main routes of the Austronesian trade ships to Giao Chỉ (in the Tonkin Gulf ) and Guangzhou (southern China ), the endpoints (later also including Quanzhou by the 10th century CE). [ 37 ] Secondary routes also passed through the coastlines of the Gulf of Thailand ; [ 35 ] [ 48 ] as well as through the Java Sea , Celebes Sea , Banda Sea , and the Sulu Sea , reconnecting with the main route through the northern Philippines and Taiwan . The secondary routes also continue onward to the East China Sea and the Yellow Sea for a limited extent. [ 35 ] [ 49 ] The main route of the western regions of the Maritime Silk Road directly crosses the Indian Ocean from the northern tip of Sumatra (or through the Sunda Strait ) to Sri Lanka , southern India and Bangladesh , and the Maldives . It branches from here into routes through the Arabian Sea entering the Gulf of Oman (into the Persian Gulf ), and the Gulf of Aden (into the Red Sea ). Secondary routes also pass through the coastlines of the Bay of Bengal , the Arabian Sea, and southwards along the coast of East Africa to Zanzibar , the Comoros , Madagascar , and the Seychelles . [ 35 ] [ 50 ] The term "Maritime Silk Road" is a modern name, acquired from its similarity to the overland Silk Road. Like the overland routes, the ancient maritime routes through Southeast Asia and the Indian Ocean had no particular name for the majority of its very long history. [ 37 ] Despite the modern name, the Maritime Silk Road involved exchanges in a wide variety of goods over a very wide region, not just silk or Asian exports. [ 40 ] [ 49 ] It differed significantly in several aspects from the overland Silk Road, and thus should not be viewed as a mere extension of it. Traders traveling through the Maritime Silk Road could span the entire distance of the maritime routes, instead of through regional relays as with the overland route. Ships could carry far larger amounts of goods, creating greater economic impact with each exchange. Goods carried by the ships also differed from goods carried by caravans. Traders on the maritime route faced different perils like weather and piracy , but they were not affected by political instability and could simply avoid areas in conflict. [ 40 ] History Precursors Chinese and Central Asian contacts (2nd millennium BCE) Chinese jade and steatite plaques, in the Scythian-style animal art of the steppes. 4th–3rd century BCE. British Museum . Central Eurasia has been known from ancient times for its horse riding and horse breeding communities, and the overland Steppe Route across the northern steppes of Central Eurasia was in use long before that of the Silk Road. [ 14 ] Archeological sites, such as the Berel burial ground in Kazakhstan , confirmed that the nomadic Arimaspians were not only breeding horses for trade but also produced great craftsmen able to propagate exquisite art pieces along the Silk Road. [ 51 ] [ 52 ] From the 2nd millennium BCE, nephrite jade was being traded from mines in the region of Yarkand and Khotan to China. [ 53 ] Significantly, these mines were not very far from the lapis lazuli and spinel ("Balas Ruby") mines in Badakhshan , and, although separated by the formidable Pamir Mountains , routes across them were in use from very early times. [ 54 ] Genetic study of the Tarim mummies , found in the Tarim Basin , in the area of Loulan located along the Silk Road 200 kilometres (124 miles) east of Yingpan, dating to as early as 1600 BCE, suggest very ancient contacts between East and West. These mummified remains may have been of people who spoke Indo-European languages , which remained in use in the Tarim Basin, in the modern day Xinjiang region, until replaced by Turkic influences from the Xiongnu culture to the north and by Chinese influences from the eastern Han dynasty , who spoke a Sino-Tibetan language . [ citation needed ] Some remnants of what was probably Chinese silk dating from 1070 BCE have been found in Ancient Egypt . The Great Oasis cities of Central Asia played a crucial role in the effective functioning of the Silk Road trade. [ 55 ] The originating source seems sufficiently reliable, but silk degrades very rapidly, so it cannot be verified whether it was cultivated silk (which almost certainly came from China) or a type of wild silk , which might have come from the Mediterranean or Middle East. [ 56 ] Following contacts between China and nomadic groups along its western borders in the 8th century BCE, gold was introduced from Central Asia, and Chinese jade carvers began to imitate steppe designs, adopting the Scythian -style animal art depicting animals locked in combat. This style is particularly reflected in the rectangular belt plaques made of gold and bronze, with other versions in jade and steatite . [ citation needed ] An elite 6th century BCE burial near Stuttgart , Germany, contained Greek bronzes as well as Chinese silks. [ 57 ] Similar animal-shaped pieces of art and wrestler motifs on belts have been found in Scythian grave sites stretching from the Black