Ancient history - Wikipedia Jump to content From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Period between prehistory and the medieval era This article is about history from the beginning of writing. For other uses, see Ancient history (disambiguation) . "Ancient" and "Ancient World" redirect here. For the TV series, see The Ancient World (TV series) . For other uses, see Ancient (disambiguation) . This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page . ( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article may be too technical for most readers to understand . Please help improve it to make it understandable to non-experts , without removing the technical details. ( July 2026 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article may be confusing or unclear to readers . Please help clarify the article . There might be a discussion about this on the talk page . ( July 2026 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The Standard of Ur ( Sumerian ) The Mask of Tutankhamun ( Egyptian ) The Priest-King ( Indus Valley ) The Venus de Milo ( Greek ) The Sarcophagus of the Spouses ( Etruscan ) The Augustus of Prima Porta ( Roman ) A soldier from the Terracotta Army ( Chinese ) The Haniwa warrior in Keiko Armor ( Japanese ) A colossal head ( Olmec ) Well-known ancient artwork and sculptures, each representing a certain civilisation. Ancient history Preceded by prehistory Near East Sumer Kish Egypt Elam Ebla Mari Armi Hatti Dilmun Magan Nubia Berbers Akkad Assyria Babylonia Qatna Amurru Yamhad Urkesh Mitanni Hittites Phrygians Ugarit Canaan Phoenicia Alashiya Arameans Israel and Judah Sabaʾ Himyar Chaldea Urartu Media Phrygia Achaemenid Empire Sea Peoples Anatolia Arabia Egypt Iran The Levant Mesopotamia Europe Aegean Civilization Greece Thracians Dacians Illyrians Paeonians Pelasgians Argaric Torrean Nuragic Talaiotic Tartessos Guanches Etruscans Rome Migration Period Barbarian kingdoms Old Europe Paleo-European Pre-Indo-European Balts Celts Finnic Germanics Slavs Iberia Italy Gaul British Isles Sápmi Karelia Scandinavia Germania Illyria Thrace Dacia Paeonia Malta Caucasus Northeast Africa and Horn of Africa Egypt Land of Punt Nubia Ancient Somali city-states Kerma Kingdom Macrobia Dʿmt Kingdom of Kush Kingdom of Aksum Kingdom of Simien Harla Kingdom Barbaria Opone Malao Mosylon Mundus Toniki Aromata Avalites Sarapion Nicon Essina Rauso Nilotic Peoples African kingdoms North Africa Carthage Garamantes Nasamones chiefdom Cyrene Blemmyes Massylii Confederation Numidia Mauretania Nobatia Kingdom of Ouarsenis Kingdom of the Vandals and Alans Kingdom of Capsus Kingdom of Masuna Kingdom of the Aurès Kingdom of Makuria Kingdom of Hodna Nemencha Laguatan Alodia Kingdom of Altava Libya African kingdoms Eurasian Steppe Proto-Indo-Europeans Afanasievo Indo-Iranians Scythia Tungusic Mohe Tocharians Qiang Donghu Yuezhi Wusun Xiongnu Huns Hunas Xionites Iranian Huns Hephthalites Proto-Mongols Wuhuan Kumo Xi Xianbei Tuyuhun Rouran Khitan Shiwei Pannonian Avars Turks Hu Four Barbarians Five Barbarians Eurasian nomads Nomadic empire Siberia Central Asia Bactria Bactria–Margiana Sarazm Sogdia / Kangju Greco-Bactrian Kingdom Yavana Kingdom Kushan Empire Badakhshan Transoxiana Khwarazm Khorasan Margiana Parthia Dahae Fergana Valley Tarim Basin East Asia China Japan Korea Manchuria Mongolia Taiwan Tibet Xinjiang South Asia Indus Valley Civilisation Vedic period Mahajanapadas Nanda Empire Maurya Empire Satavahana dynasty Sangam period Middle kingdoms Northern America Adena Hopewell Mississippian Ancestral Puebloans Hohokam Mogollon Fremont Patayan Sinagua Pre-Dorset Thule people Glades St. Johns culture Mesoamerica Olmecs Epi-Olmec Capacha Maya Huastec Mixtec Xochipala Gran Coclé Izapa Tlatilco Cuicuilco Zapotec Mezcala Chupícuaro Quelepa Western Mexico shaft tomb tradition Teuchitlán Veraguas Diquis Cholula Teotihuacan Nicoya Veracruz Totonac Toltec Andes Caral–Supe Casma–Sechin Chavín Paracas Nazca Moche Lima Tiwanaku Upano Valley Wari Caribbean Ortoiroid people Guanahatabey Saladoid Kalinago Kalina Arawak Indigenous peoples Seafaring West Africa and Central Africa Kintampo Dhar Tichitt Oualata Nok Sao Ekoi Senegambia Serer Senegambia megaliths Pre-imperial Mali Djenné-Djenno Igodomigodo Bantu Bura Sahelian kingdoms Ghana Empire Takrur Pygmies African kingdoms Southeast Asia and Oceania Melanesians Austronesians Australia Micronesia Melanesia Polynesia Hồng Bàng Suvarnabhumi Singhanavati Sungai Batu Mon Pyu Thaton Âu Lạc Nanyue Chi Tu Tun Sun Funan Tambralinga Langkasuka Tagaung Gangga Negara Sri Ksetra Champa Lâm Ấp Quduqian Pan Pan Arakan Kutai Xitu Tarumanagara Kantoli Mueang Pahang Lavo Kalingga Melayu Dvaravati Chenla Srivijaya Shailendra Cambodia Laos Malaysia Myanmar Thailand Vietnam Brunei Indonesia Timor Philippines Singapore See also Human history Ancient maritime history Protohistory Copper Age Bronze Age Axial Age Iron Age Historiography Ancient literature Ancient warfare Cradle of civilization Ancient religion Category Followed by Post-classical history v t e Part of a series on Human history ↑ Prehistory ( Stone Age ) ( Pleistocene epoch ) Holocene Timelines Neolithic – Contemporary ( 10,000 BCE – present ) Age of the human race Recorded history ( Common Era ) Earliest records Protohistory Proto-writing Ancient Copper Age Bronze Age Iron Age Axial Age Classical antiquity Late antiquity Africa North America South America Oceania East Asia South Asia Southeast Asia West Asia Europe Postclassical Timeline Africa Americas Oceania East Asia South Asia Southeast Asia West Asia Europe Renaissance Modern Early modern Late modern Contemporary Africa North America South America Oceania East Asia South Asia Southeast Asia West Asia Europe See also Age of Discovery Modernity Postmodernity Futurology Political history ↓ Future v t e Ancient history is a time period from the beginning of writing and recorded human history through late antiquity . The span of recorded history is roughly 5,000 years, beginning with the development of Sumerian cuneiform script. Ancient history covers all continents inhabited by humans in the period 3000 BC – AD 500, ending with the expansion of Islam in late antiquity. [ 1 ] The three-age system periodises ancient history into the Stone Age , the Bronze Age , and the Iron Age , with recorded history usually considered to begin with the Bronze Age. The start and end of the three ages vary between world regions. In many regions, the Bronze Age is generally considered to begin a few centuries prior to 3000 BC, while the end of the Iron Age varies from the early first millennium BC in some regions to the late first millennium AD in others. [ 2 ] During the time period of ancient history, the world population was exponentially increasing due to the Neolithic Revolution , which was in full progress. In 10,000 BC, the world population stood at an estimated 2 million, it rose to 45 million by 3000 BC. By the Iron Age in 1000 BC, the population had risen to 72 million. By the end of the ancient period in AD 500, the world population is thought to have stood at 209 million. In 10,500 years, the world population increased by 100 times. [ 3 ] Prehistory [ edit ] Main articles: Prehistory and Neolithic Revolution Prehistory is the period before written history. Most of the knowledge of that period comes from the work of archaeologists . [ 4 ] The early human migrations in the Lower Paleolithic saw Homo erectus spread across Eurasia 1.8 million years ago. [ 5 ] Evidence for the use of fire has been dated as early as 1.8 million years ago, a date which is contested, [ 6 ] with generally accepted evidence for the controlled use of fire dating to 780,000 years ago. Actual use of hearths first appears 400,000 years ago. [ 7 ] Dates for the emergence of Homo sapiens (modern humans) range from 250,000 [ 8 ] to 160,000 years ago, [ 9 ] with the varying dates being based on DNA studies [ 8 ] and fossils respectively. [ 9 ] Some 50,000 years ago, Homo sapiens migrated out of Africa . They reached Australia about 45,000 years ago, southwestern Europe about the same time, southeastern Europe and Siberia around 40,000 years ago, and Japan about 30,000 years ago. Humans migrated to the Americas about 15,000 years ago. [ 10 ] Evidence for agriculture emerges in about 9000 BC in what is now eastern Turkey and spread through the Fertile Crescent . [ 11 ] The settlement at Göbekli Tepe began around 9500 BC and may have the world's oldest temple. [ 12 ] The Nile River Valley has evidence of sorghum and millet cultivation starting around 8000 BC and agricultural use of yams in Western Africa perhaps dates to the same time period. Cultivation of millet, rice , and legumes began around 7000 BC in China . Taro cultivation in New Guinea dates to about 7000 BC also with squash cultivation in Mesoamerica perhaps sharing that date. [ 11 ] Animal domestication began with the domestication of dogs , which dates to at least 15,000 years ago, and perhaps even earlier. Sheep and goats were domesticated around 9000 BC in the Fertile Crescent, alongside the first evidence for agriculture. Other animals, such as pigs and poultry , were later domesticated and used as food sources. [ 13 ] Cattle and water buffalo were domesticated around 7000 BC and horses , donkeys , and camels were domesticated by about 4000 BC. All of these animals were used not only for food, but to carry and pull people and loads, greatly increasing human ability to do work. The invention of the simple plough by 6000 BC further increased agricultural efficiency. [ 14 ] Metal use in the form of hammered copper items predates the discovery of smelting of copper ores , which happened around 6000 BC in western Asia and independently in eastern Asia before 2000 BC. Gold and silver use dates to between 6000 and 5000 BC. Alloy metallurgy began with bronze in about 3500 BC in Mesopotamia and was developed independently in China by 2000 BC. [ 15 ] Pottery developed independently throughout the world, [ 16 ] with fired pots appearing first among the Jomon of Japan and in West Africa at Mali . [ 17 ] Sometime between 5000 and 4000 BC the potter's wheel was invented. [ 16 ] By 3000 BC, [ 18 ] the pottery wheel was adapted into wheeled vehicles which could be used to carry loads further and easier than with human or animal power alone. [ 16 ] Writing developed separately in five different locations in human history: Mesopotamia, Egypt, India, China, and Mesoamerica. [ 19 ] By 3400 BC, "proto-literate" cuneiform spread in the Middle East. [ 20 ] Egypt developed its own system of hieroglyphs by about 3200 BC. [ 19 ] By 2800 BC the Indus Valley Civilisation had developed its Indus script , which remains undeciphered. [ 21 ] Chinese Characters were independently developed in China during the Shang dynasty in the form of the Oracle Bone Script dating to the period 1600 to 1100 BC. [ 22 ] Writing in Mesoamerica dates to 600 BC with the Zapotec civilization . [ 23 ] History by region [ edit ] West Asia [ edit ] Main article: Ancient Near East The ancient Near East is considered the cradle of civilisation . [ 24 ] It was the first to practice intensive year-round agriculture; [ 25 ] created one of the first coherent writing systems , [ 19 ] invented the potter's wheel and then the vehicular wheel , [ 16 ] created the first centralised governments , [ 26 ] law codes [ 27 ] and empires, [ 28 ] as well as displaying social stratification , [ 24 ] slavery, [ 27 ] and organized warfare. [ 29 ] It began the study of the stars and the sciences of astronomy and mathematics. [ 30 ] Mesopotamia [ edit ] Further information: Mesopotamia and History of Iraq Ancient Egypt and the core territory of 15th century BC Assyria , with its two major cities Assur and Nineveh , was upstream of Babylonia and downstream of the states of Mitanni and Hatti . Mesopotamia is the site of some of the earliest known civilisations in the world. [ 31 ] Agricultural communities emerged in the area with the Halaf culture around 8000 BC and continued to expand through the Ubaid period around 6000 BC. [ 32 ] Cities began in the Uruk period (4000–3100 BC) and expanded during the Jemdet Nasr (3100–2900 BC) and Early Dynastic (2900–2350 BC) periods. [ 33 ] The surplus of storable foodstuffs created by this economy allowed the population to settle in one place instead of migrating after crops and herds. It also allowed for a much greater population density, and in turn required an extensive labour force and division of labour. [ 17 ] This organisation led to the necessity of record keeping and the development of writing. [ 34 ] Babylonia was an Amorite state in lower Mesopotamia (modern southern Iraq ), [ 35 ] with Babylon as its capital. Babylonia emerged when Hammurabi created an empire out of the territories of the former kingdoms of Sumer and Akkad . [ 35 ] The Neo-Babylonian Empire , or Chaldea , was Babylonia from the 7th and 6th centuries BC. [ 36 ] Under the reign of Nebuchadnezzar II , it conquered Jerusalem . This empire also created the Hanging Gardens of Babylon and the still-surviving Ishtar Gate as architectural embellishments of its capital at Babylon. [ 37 ] Akkad was a city and its surrounding region near Babylon. Akkad also became the capital of the Akkadian Empire. [ 38 ] Despite an extensive search, the precise site has never been found. Akkad reached the height of its power between about 2330 and 2150 BC, following the conquests of King Sargon of Akkad . [ 38 ] Through the spread of Sargon's empire, the language of Akkad, known as Akkadian from the city, spread and replaced the Sumerian language in Mesopotamia and eventually by 1450 BC was the main language of diplomacy in the Near East. [ 39 ] Assyria was originally a region on the Upper Tigris , where a small state was created in the 19th century BC. [ 36 ] The capital was at Assur , which gave the state its name. [ 40 ] Later, as a nation and empire that came to control all of the Fertile Crescent, Egypt, and much of Anatolia , the term "Assyria proper" referred to roughly the northern half of Mesopotamia (the southern half being Babylonia), with Nineveh as its capital. The Assyrian kings controlled a large kingdom at three different times in history. These are called the Old (20th to 18th centuries BC), Middle (14th to 11th centuries BC), and Neo-Assyrian (9th to 7th centuries BC) kingdoms, or periods. [ 41 ] Mitanni was a Hurrian empire in northern Mesopotamia founded around 1500 BC. The Mitanians conquered and controlled Assyria until the 14th century BC while contending with Egypt for control of parts of modern Syria. Its capital was Washukanni , whose precise location has not been determined by archaeologists. [ 42 ] Iranian peoples [ edit ] Further information: Iranic peoples , Achaemenid Empire , and History of Iran The Medes and Persians were peoples who had appeared in the Iranian plateau around 1500 BC. [ 43 ] Both peoples spoke Indo-European languages and were mostly pastoralists with a tradition of horse archery. [ 44 ] The Medes established their own Median Empire by the 6th century BC, having defeated the Neo-Assyrian Empire with the Chaldeans in 614 BC. [ 37 ] The Persian Achaemenid Empire at its greatest extent, c. 500 BC The Achaemenid Empire was founded by Cyrus the Great , who first became king of the Persians, then conquered the Medes, Lydia , and Babylon by 539 BC. The empire built on earlier Mesopotamian systems of government to govern their large empire. By building roads, they improved both the ability to send governmental instructions throughout their lands as well as improving the ability of their military forces to be deployed rapidly. Increased trade and upgraded farming techniques increased wealth, but also exacerbated inequalities between social classes. The empire's location at the centre of trading networks spread its intellectual and philosophical ideas throughout a wide area, and its religion, while not itself spreading far, had an impact on later religions such as Christianity , Islam , and Judaism . [ 44 ] Cyrus' son Cambyses II conquered Egypt, while a later emperor, Darius the Great , expanded the empire to the Indus River , creating the largest empire in the world to that date. [ 45 ] But Darius and his son Xerxes I failed to expand into Greece , with expeditions in 490 and 480 BC eventually failing. [ 46 ] The Achaemenid dynasty and empire fell to Alexander the Great by 330 BC, and after Alexander's death, much of the area previously ruled by the Cyrus and his successors was ruled by the Seleucid dynasty . [ 47 ] Assimilation of Baltic and Aryan Peoples by Uralic Speakers in the Middle and Upper Volga Basin (Shaded Relief BG) Parthia was an Iranian civilisation situated in the northeastern part of modern Iran. Their power was based on a combination of military power based on heavy cavalry with a decentralised governing structure based on a federated system . [ 48 ] The Parthian Empire was led by the Arsacid dynasty , [ 49 ] which by around 155 BC under Mithradates I had mostly conquered the Seleucid Empire . Parthia had many wars with the Romans, but it was rebellions within the empire that ended it in the 3rd century AD. [ 48 ] The Sasanian Empire began when the Parthian Empire ended in AD 224. Their rulers claimed the Achaemenids as ancestors and set up their capital at Ctesiphon in Mesopotamia. Their period of greatest military expansion occurred under Shapur I , who by the time of his death in AD 272 had defeated Roman imperial armies and set up buffer states between the Sasanians and Roman Empires. After Shapur, the Sasanians were under more pressure from the Kushans to their east as well as the Roman then Byzantine Empire to its west. However, the Sasanians rebuilt and founded numerous cities and their merchants travelled widely and introduced crops such as sugar, rice, and cotton into the Iranian plateau. But in AD 651, the last Sassanid emperor was killed by the expanding Islamic Arabs. [ 50 ] Hittites [ edit ] Largest expansion of Kingdom of Armenia under Tigranes the Great The Hittites first came to Anatolia about 1900 BC and during the period 1600–1500 they expanded into Mesopotamia where they adopted the cuneiform script to their Indo-European language. By 1200 their empire stretched to Phoenicia and eastern Anatolia . They improved two earlier technologies from Mesopotamia and spread these new techniques widely – improved iron working and light chariots with spoked wheels in warfare. The Hittites introduced the casting of iron with molds and then hammering it which enabled weapons and tools to be made stronger and also cheaper. Although chariots had been used previously, the use of spoked wheels allowed the chariots to be much lighter and more maneuverable. [ 51 ] In 1274 BC the Hittites clashed with the Egyptians at the Battle of Kadesh , where both sides claimed victory. In 1207 BC the Hittite capital of Hattusa was sacked, ending the Hittite Empire . [ 52 ] Israel [ edit ] Main article: History of Ancient Israel and Judah The Iron Age Kingdom of Israel (blue) and Kingdom of Judah (yellow) Israel and Judah were related Iron Age kingdoms of the ancient Levant and had existed during the Iron Ages and the Neo-Babylonian, Persian and Hellenistic periods. The name Israel first appears in the stele of the Egyptian pharaoh Merneptah around 1209 BC. [ 53 ] This "Israel" was a cultural and probably political entity of the central highlands, well enough established to be perceived by the Egyptians as a possible challenge to their hegemony , but an ethnic group rather than an organised state. [ 54 ] Israel had emerged by the middle of the 9th century BC, when the Assyrian King Shalmaneser III named " Ahab the Israelite" among his enemies at the battle of Qarqar (853). Judah emerged somewhat later than Israel, probably during the 9th centur