Socialism - Wikipedia Jump to content From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Political ideology emphasising social ownership of production For other uses, see Socialism (disambiguation) . Part of a series on Socialism History Outline Development French Revolution Revolutions of 1848 Socialist calculation debate Socialist economics Ideas Calculation in kind Cooperative Critique of political economy Economic democracy Economic planning Equal liberty Equal opportunity Free association Industrial democracy Internationalism Labour-time calculation Labour voucher Production for use Sharing economy Social dividend Social ownership Common ownership Socialist mode of production To each according to his contribution / needs Vanguardism Workers' self-management Models Socialist planned economy Decentralized planning Inclusive Democracy Project Cybersyn Soviet-type Market socialism Participatory economics Variants Authoritarian Blanquism Saint-Simonianism Chinese State Yellow Ecological Guild Libertarian Anarchism Fourierism Syndicalism Marxism Left-communism Owenism Progressive Democratic Ethical Market Municipal Liberal 21st-century Religious Buddhist Christian Islamic Jewish Revolutionary Social democracy Intellectuals Zeno Mazdak More Campanella Mably Morelly d'Hupay Godwin Saint-Simon Buonarroti Saint-Just Owen Fourier Hodgskin Cabet Leroux Warren Sue Blanqui Weitling Proudhon Brisbane Greeley Andrews Herzen Ingalls Bakunin Marx Greene Kingsley Engels Wallace Lavrov Lassalle Saltykov Chernyshevsky Tolstoy Michel Morris Jones Lum Mikhaylovsky Kropotkin Danielson Guillaume Carpenter Farga Vorontsov Sorel Bellamy Labadie Llunas Malatesta Tucker Kautsky Wilde Bellamy Plekhanov Beatrice Webb Ferrer Dewey Mella Gorter Cleyre Wells Du Bois Gorky Goldman Struve Landauer Berkman Luxemburg Shūsui Russell Pannekoek Rocker Rühle Spengler Keller Tawney Pankhurst Volin Lukács Korsch Polanyi Vanzetti Makhno Bordiga Cole Serge Gramsci Sacco Day Marcuse James Orwell Sartre Bookchin Zinn Castoriadis Thompson Gutiérrez Chomsky Debord Parenti Fotopoulos Newton Wolff Ali Dauvé Hampton Žižek Öcalan West Hedges Varoufakis Saito Politicians Roux Babeuf Blanc Hong Pi i Margall Bebel Most Bernstein Natanson De Leon Mikhailov Debs Pease Sidney Webb Markievicz Connolly Gandhi Lenin Liebknecht Savage Blum Stauning Martov Bitsenko Nygaardsvold Trotsky Kerensky Attlee Kamenev Zinoviev Spiridonova Chifley Nikiforova Kamkov Drees Kolegayev Nehru Tito Nagy Gerhardsen Van Acker Spaak Sukarno Erlander Douglas Montseny Senghor Allende van der Lubbe Nkrumah Kreisky Taruc Wilson Corvalán Mitterrand Nasser Mandela Dubček Nyerere Koivisto Manley Benn Palme Bhutto Che MLK Gorbachev Ismail Vázquez Sanders González Lula Ortega Guterres Corbyn Sankara Mélenchon Hawkins Chávez Galloway Marcos Morales Glasman Maduro Ocasio-Cortez Mamdani Sultana Xi Organizations Socialist Party International League of Religious Socialists Labour and Socialist International Network of Social Democracy in Asia Party of European Socialists Progressive International Socialist International Sovintern World Socialist Movement Young European Socialists Related ideologies Classical radicalism Cyber-utopianism Gandhian socialism Labor Zionism Left-conservatism Left-wing nationalism Progressivism Economic Social corporatism Socialist democracy Socialist feminism Utopian socialism Related topics Capitalism Communist society Criticism of capitalism Criticism of socialism Economic calculation problem Economic system Socialism in France Left-libertarianism Libertarianism Market abolitionism Marxist philosophy Nanosocialism Socialism and LGBTQ rights Socialist calculation debate Socialist Party Socialist state Workers' council Lists Democratic socialists Democratic socialist parties and organizations Economists Films Social democrats Social democratic parties Songs States Socialism portal Economics portal Politics portal v t e Socialism is an economic ideology and political philosophy encompassing diverse economic and social systems [ 1 ] characterised by social ownership of the means of production , [ 2 ] as opposed to private ownership . [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] It describes the economic , political , and social theories and movements associated with the implementation of such systems. [ 6 ] Social ownership can take various forms, including public , community , collective , cooperative , [ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] or employee . [ 10 ] [ 11 ] As one of the main ideologies on the political spectrum , socialism is the standard left-wing ideology in most countries. [ 12 ] Types of socialism vary based on the role of markets and planning in resource allocation , and the structure of management in organizations. [ 13 ] [ 14 ] Socialist systems are divided into non-market and market forms. [ 15 ] [ 16 ] A non-market socialist system seeks to eliminate the perceived inefficiencies, irrationalities, unpredictability , and crises that socialists traditionally associate with capital accumulation and the profit system. [ 17 ] Market socialism retains the use of monetary prices, factor markets and sometimes the profit motive . [ 18 ] [ 19 ] [ 20 ] As a political force, socialist parties and ideas exercise varying degrees of power and influence, heading national governments in several countries. Socialist politics have been internationalist and nationalist ; organised through political parties and opposed to party politics; at times overlapping with trade unions and other times independent and critical of them, and present in industrialised and developing nations. [ 21 ] Social democracy originated within the socialist movement, [ 22 ] supporting economic and social interventions to promote social justice . [ 23 ] [ 24 ] While retaining socialism as a long-term goal, [ 25 ] in the post-war period social democracy embraced a mixed economy based on Keynesianism within a predominantly developed capitalist market economy and liberal democratic polity that expands state intervention to include income redistribution , regulation , and a welfare state . [ 26 ] [ 27 ] The socialist political movement includes political philosophies that originated in the revolutionary movements of the mid-to-late 18th century and out of concern for the social problems that socialists associated with capitalism. [ 28 ] By the late 19th century, after the work of Karl Marx and his collaborator Friedrich Engels , socialism had come to signify anti-capitalism and advocacy for a post-capitalist system based on some form of social ownership of the means of production. [ 29 ] [ 30 ] By the early 1920s, communism and social democracy had become the two dominant political tendencies within the international socialist movement, [ 31 ] with socialism itself becoming the most influential secular movement of the 20th century. [ 32 ] Many socialists also adopted the causes of other social movements, such as feminism , environmentalism , and progressivism . [ 33 ] Although the emergence of the Soviet Union as the world's first nominally socialist state led to the widespread association of socialism with the Soviet economic model , the term has since shifted to be associated with democratic socialism . Academics sometimes recognised the mixed economies of several Western European and Nordic countries as "democratic socialist", [ 34 ] [ 35 ] although the system of these countries, with only limited social ownership (generally in the form of state ownership), is more usually described as social democracy . Following the revolutions of 1989 , many of these countries moved away from socialism as a neoliberal consensus replaced the social democratic consensus in the advanced capitalist world. [ 36 ] In parallel, many former socialist politicians and political parties embraced " Third Way " politics, remaining committed to equality and welfare while abandoning public ownership and class-based politics. [ 37 ] Socialist politics experienced a revival in parts of the Western world during the 2010s, amid growing economic inequality , dissatisfaction with the aftermath of the 2008 financial crisis , and perceptions that political institutions favored economic elites. [ 38 ] Etymology According to Andrew Vincent, the word 'socialism' finds its root in the Latin sociare , which means to combine or to share. The related, more technical term in Roman and then medieval law was societas . This latter word could mean companionship and fellowship as well as the more legalistic idea of a consensual contract between freemen. [ 39 ] 19th century utopian socialist pamphlet by Rudolf Sutermeister Initial use of socialism was claimed by Pierre Leroux , who alleged he first used the term in the Parisian journal Le Globe in 1832. [ 40 ] [ 41 ] Leroux was a follower of Henri de Saint-Simon , one of the founders of what would later be labelled utopian socialism . Socialism contrasted with the liberal doctrine of individualism that emphasized the moral worth of the individual while stressing that people act or should act as if they are in isolation from one another. The original utopian socialists condemned this doctrine of individualism for failing to address social concerns during the Industrial Revolution , including poverty, oppression, and vast wealth inequality . They viewed their society as harming community life by basing society on competition. They presented socialism as an alternative to liberal individualism based on the shared ownership of resources. [ 42 ] Saint-Simon proposed economic planning , scientific administration and the application of scientific understanding to the organisation of society. By contrast, Robert Owen proposed to organise production and ownership via cooperatives . [ 42 ] [ 43 ] Socialism is also attributed in France to Marie Roch Louis Reybaud while in Britain it is attributed to Owen, who became one of the fathers of the cooperative movement . [ 44 ] [ 45 ] The definition and usage of socialism settled by the 1860s, with the term socialist replacing associationist , co-operative , mutualist and collectivist , which had been used as synonyms, while the term communism fell out of use during this period. [ 46 ] An early distinction between communism and socialism was that the latter aimed to only socialise production while the former aimed to socialise both production and consumption (in the form of free access to final goods). [ 47 ] By 1888, Marxists employed socialism in place of communism as the latter had come to be considered an old-fashioned synonym for socialism . It was not until after the Bolshevik Revolution that socialism was appropriated by Vladimir Lenin to mean a stage between capitalism and communism. He used it to defend the Bolshevik program from Marxist criticism that Russia's productive forces were not sufficiently developed for communism. [ 48 ] The distinction between communism and socialism became salient in 1918 after the Russian Social Democratic Labour Party renamed itself to the All-Russian Communist Party , interpreting communism specifically to mean socialists who supported the politics and theories of Bolshevism , Leninism and later that of Marxism–Leninism , [ 49 ] although communist parties continued to describe themselves as socialists dedicated to socialism. [ 50 ] According to The Oxford Handbook of Karl Marx , "Marx used many terms to refer to a post-capitalist society —positive humanism , socialism, communism, realm of free individuality, free association of producers , etc. He used these terms completely interchangeably. The notion that 'socialism' and 'communism' are distinct historical stages is alien to his work and only entered the lexicon of Marxism after his death". [ 51 ] In Christian Europe , communists were believed to have adopted atheism . In Protestant England, communism was too close to the Roman Catholic communion rite , hence socialist was the preferred term. [ 52 ] Engels wrote that in 1848, when The Communist Manifesto was published, socialism was respectable in Europe while communism was not. The Owenites in England and the Fourierists in France were considered respectable socialists while working-class movements that "proclaimed the necessity of total social change" denoted themselves communists . [ 53 ] This branch of socialism produced the communist work of Étienne Cabet in France and Wilhelm Weitling in Germany. [ 54 ] British moral philosopher John Stuart Mill discussed a form of economic socialism within free market. In later editions of his Principles of Political Economy (1848), Mill posited that "as far as economic theory was concerned, there is nothing in principle in economic theory that precludes an economic order based on socialist policies" [ 55 ] [ 56 ] and promoted substituting capitalist businesses with worker cooperatives . [ 57 ] While democrats looked to the Revolutions of 1848 as a democratic revolution which in the long run ensured liberty, equality, and fraternity , Marxists denounced it as a betrayal of working-class ideals by a bourgeoisie indifferent to the proletariat . [ 58 ] History Main article: History of socialism This section appears to be slanted towards recent events . Please try to keep recent events in historical perspective and add more content related to non-recent events. ( January 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) New Harmony, a utopian attempt as proposed by Robert Owen The history of socialism has its origins in the Age of Enlightenment and the 1789 French Revolution , along with the changes that brought, although it has precedents in earlier movements and ideas. The Communist Manifesto was written by Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels in 1847–48 just before the Revolutions of 1848 swept Europe, expressing what they termed scientific socialism . In the last third of the 19th century parties dedicated to Democratic socialism arose in Europe, drawing mainly from Marxism . For a duration of one week in December 1899, the Australian Labor Party formed the first socialist government in the world when it was elected into power in the Colony of Queensland with Premier Anderson Dawson as its leader. [ 59 ] 20th century States that had socialist governments States that the Soviet Union believed at one point to be moving toward socialism Other states allied with the Soviet Union at some point In the first half of the 20th century, the Soviet Union and the communist parties of the Third International around the world, came to represent socialism in terms of the Soviet model of economic development and the creation of centrally planned economies directed by a state that owns all the means of production , although other trends condemned what they saw as the lack of democracy. The establishment of the People's Republic of China in 1949, saw socialism introduced. China established a self-sufficient and self-reliant economy that was state-led and focused on rapid industrialization. [ 60 ] Other policies included land redistribution and the Anti-Rightist Movement , followed by the disastrous Great Leap Forward . Elsewhere, in contrast, reformist social democrats and democratic socialists came to power through the ballot box. In the UK, Herbert Morrison said that "socialism is what the Labour government does" whereas Aneurin Bevan argued socialism requires that the "main streams of economic activity are brought under public direction", with an economic plan and workers' democracy. [ 61 ] Some argued that capitalism had been abolished. [ 62 ] Socialist governments established the mixed economy with partial nationalisations and social welfare, as represented for example by the Nordic model . By 1968, the prolonged Vietnam War gave rise to the New Left , socialists who tended to be critical of the Soviet Union and social democracy . Anarcho-syndicalists and some elements of the New Left and others favoured decentralised collective ownership in the form of cooperatives or workers' councils . In 1989, the Soviet Union saw the end of communism , marked by the Revolutions of 1989 across Eastern Europe , culminating in the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991. Socialists have adopted the causes of other social movements such as environmentalism , feminism and progressivism . [ 63 ] Early 21st century See also: Socialism of the 21st century Map showing socialism in Latin America, the pink tide (Foro de São Paulo members) in 2023: Socialist government Member not in government In 1990, the São Paulo Forum was launched by the Workers' Party (Brazil) , linking left-wing socialist parties in Latin America. Its members were associated with the pink tide of left-wing governments on the continent in the early 21st century. Member parties ruling countries included the Front for Victory in Argentina, the PAIS Alliance in Ecuador, Farabundo Martí National Liberation Front in El Salvador, Peru Wins in Peru, and the United Socialist Party of Venezuela , whose leader Hugo Chávez initiated what he called " Socialism of the 21st century ". Many mainstream democratic socialist and social democratic parties continued to drift right-wards. On the right of the socialist movement, the Progressive Alliance was founded in 2013 by current or former members of the Socialist International . The organisation states the aim of becoming the global network of "the progressive , democratic , social-democratic , socialist and labour movement ". [ 64 ] [ 65 ] Mainstream social democratic and socialist parties are also networked in Europe in the Party of European Socialists formed in 1992. Many of these parties lost large parts of their electoral base in the early 21st century. This phenomenon is known as Pasokification [ 66 ] [ 67 ] from the Greek party PASOK , which saw a declining share of the vote in national elections—from 43.9% in 2009 to 13.2% in May 2012, to 12.3% in June 2012 and 4.7% in 2015—due to its poor handling of the Greek government-debt crisis and implementation of harsh austerity measures. [ 68 ] [ 69 ] In Europe, the share of votes for such socialist parties was at its 70-year lowest in 2015. For example, the Socialist Party , after winning the 2012 French presidential election , rapidly lost its vote share, the Social Democratic Party of Germany 's fortunes declined rapidly from 2005 to 2019, and outside Europe the Israeli Labor Party fell from being the dominant force in Israeli politics to 4.43% of the vote in the April 2019 Israeli legislative election , and the Peruvian Aprista Party went from ruling party in 2011 to a minor party. The decline of these mainstream parties opened space for more radical and populist left parties in some countries, such as Spain's Podemos , Greece's Syriza (in government, 2015–19), Germany's Die Linke , and France's La France Insoumise . In other countries, left-wing revivals have taken place within mainstream democratic socialist and centrist parties, as with Jeremy Corbyn in the United Kingdom and Bernie Sanders in the United States in the 2010s. [ 38 ] Few of these radical left parties have won national government in Europe, while some more mainstream socialist parties have managed to, such as Portugal's Socialist Party . [ 70 ] Top-left: a picture of the [[Red flag (politics)|red flags]] found by the [[Monument to the People s Heroes]], China. br />Top-right: a demonstration in Austin, Texas, US by the [[Democratic Socialists of America]]. br />Bottom-left: a demonstration by the [[Socialist Youth (Portugal)|Portuguese Socialist Youth]]. br />Bottom-right: a rally for abortion rights in [[Melbourne, Victoria, Australia]] being led by members of the [[Victorian Socialists]]."}},"i":0}}]}'> Socialism across the world. Top-left: a picture of the red flags found by the Monument to the People's Heroes , China. Top-right: a demonstration in Austin, Texas, US by the Democratic Socialists of America . Bottom-left: a demonstration by the Portuguese Socialist Youth . Bottom-right: a rally for abortion rights in Melbourne, Victoria, Australia being led by