List of unsolved problems in physics - Wikipedia Jump to content From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This is a dynamic list and may never be able to satisfy particular standards for completeness. You can help by editing the page to add missing items, with references to reliable sources . Some of the major unsolved problems in physics are theoretical, meaning that existing theories are currently unable to explain certain observed phenomena or experimental results. Others are experimental, involving challenges in creating experiments to test proposed theories or to investigate specific phenomena in greater detail. A number of important questions remain open in the area of physics beyond the Standard Model , such as the strong CP problem , determining the absolute mass of neutrinos , understanding matter–antimatter asymmetry , and identifying the nature of dark matter and dark energy . [ 1 ] [ 2 ] Another significant problem lies within the mathematical framework of the Standard Model itself, which remains inconsistent with general relativity . This incompatibility causes both theories to break down under extreme conditions, such as within known spacetime gravitational singularities like those at the Big Bang and at the centers of black holes beyond their event horizons . [ 3 ] Historical problems and lists [ edit ] Isaac Newton in his book Opticks (first edition 1704), published a list of 31 queries about light and matter. [ 4 ] In 1900, Lord Kelvin in a speech identified two main issues in classical physics that represented "two clouds" for the physics of 20th century: the lack of evidence for the existence of the luminiferous aether and the failures of the equipartition theorem in predicting the heat capacity of solids. Both problems were solved within a decade with the development of special relativity and quantum mechanics respectively. [ 5 ] In 1982, Roger Penrose proposed a list of mathematical physics problems related to general relativity , about 14 problems remain unsolved as of 2017. [ 6 ] [ 7 ] A similar list of 53 problems was made by Robert Bartnik in 1988. [ 8 ] [ 7 ] In 1984, mathematical physicist Barry Simon proposed a list of 15 open problems on quantum operators (about 5 already solved in 2000). [ 9 ] [ 10 ] A second list of 15 Simon problems was released in 2000 (at least 3 problems solved). [ 10 ] Nobel laureate Vitaly Ginzburg is known for having compiled from 1971 to 2005, a list of open problems in physics on "the verge of the 21st century", the final list includes 30 problems. [ 11 ] [ 12 ] Ginzburg also included three "great problems": the problem of the arrow of time , the interpretations of quantum mechanics and life arising from physics alone . [ 13 ] During the Strings 2000 conference a list of 10 millennium problems in theoretical physics was proposed by its members, none has been conclusively solved as of 2025. [ 14 ] Mathematical lists [ edit ] Some mathematical physics problems are included in notable lists of unsolved problems in mathematics , these include: The sixth problem of 1900 Hilbert's problems about the axiomatization of physics, the problem is either ill-defined or partially solved. [ 15 ] The Navier–Stokes existence and smoothness and the Yang–Mills existence and mass gap problems of the Millennium Prize Problems , both remain unsolved. [ 16 ] Navier–Stokes smoothness is also the 15th Smale's problem from 1998. [ 17 ] United States DARPA issued 23 mathematical challenges in 2008. Physics problems included: advancing techniques in modelling fluid dynamics and soft matter , developing mathematics for quantum computing , applying quantum field theory and action principles to biology, and finding a relation between the geometric Langlands program and quantum physics. [ 7 ] [ 18 ] [ 19 ] List by topic [ edit ] General physics [ edit ] Theory of everything : Is there a singular, all-encompassing, coherent theoretical framework of physics that fully explains and links together all physical aspects of the universe ? [ 20 ] Dimensionless physical constants : At the present time, the values of various dimensionless physical constants cannot be calculated; they can be determined only by physical measurement. [ 21 ] [ 22 ] What is the minimum number of dimensionless physical constants from which all other dimensionless physical constants can be derived? Are dimensional physical constants necessary at all? [ 23 ] Quantum gravity [ edit ] Quantum gravity : Can quantum mechanics and general relativity be realized as a fully consistent theory (perhaps as a quantum field theory )? [ 24 ] Is spacetime fundamentally continuous or discrete? Would a consistent theory involve a force mediated by a hypothetical graviton , or be a product of a discrete structure of spacetime itself (as in loop quantum gravity )? Are there deviations from the predictions of general relativity at very small or very large scales or in other extreme circumstances that flow from a quantum gravity mechanism? Black holes , black hole information paradox , and black hole radiation : Do black holes produce thermal radiation, as expected on theoretical grounds? [ 25 ] Does this radiation contain information about their inner structure, as suggested by gauge–gravity duality , or not, as implied by Hawking 's original calculation? If not, and black holes can evaporate away, what happens to the information stored in them (since quantum mechanics does not provide for the destruction of information)? Or does the radiation stop at some point, leaving black hole remnants? Is there another way to probe their internal structure somehow, if such a structure even exists ? The cosmic censorship hypothesis and the chronology protection conjecture : Can singularities not hidden behind an event horizon, known as " naked singularities ", arise from realistic initial conditions, or is it possible to prove some version of the "cosmic censorship hypothesis" of Roger Penrose which proposes that this is impossible? [ 26 ] Similarly, will the closed timelike curves which arise in some solutions to the equations of general relativity (and which imply the possibility of backwards time travel ) be ruled out by a theory of quantum gravity which unites general relativity with quantum mechanics, as suggested by the "chronology protection conjecture" of Stephen Hawking ? Holographic principle : Is it true that quantum gravity admits a lower-dimensional description that does not contain gravity? A well-understood example of holography is the AdS/CFT correspondence in string theory . Similarly, can quantum gravity in a de Sitter space be understood using dS/CFT correspondence ? Can the AdS/CFT correspondence be vastly generalized to the gauge–gravity duality for arbitrary asymptotic spacetime backgrounds? Are there other theories of quantum gravity other than string theory that admit a holographic description? Quantum spacetime or the emergence of spacetime: Is the nature of spacetime at the Planck scale very different from the continuous classical dynamical spacetime that exists in general relativity? In loop quantum gravity, the spacetime is postulated to be discrete from the beginning. In string theory, although originally spacetime was considered just like in general relativity (with the only difference being supersymmetry ), recent research building upon the Ryu–Takayanagi conjecture has taught that spacetime in string theory is emergent by using quantum information theoretic concepts such as entanglement entropy in the AdS/CFT correspondence. [ 27 ] However, how exactly the familiar classical spacetime emerges within string theory or the AdS/CFT correspondence is still not well understood. Problem of time : In quantum mechanics, time is a classical background parameter, and the flow of time is universal and absolute. In general relativity, time is one component of four-dimensional spacetime , and the flow of time changes depending on the curvature of spacetime and the spacetime trajectory of the observer. How can these two concepts of time be reconciled? [ 28 ] Quantum physics [ edit ] Yang–Mills theory : Given an arbitrary compact gauge group , does a non-trivial quantum Yang–Mills theory with a finite mass gap exist? (This problem is also listed as one of the Millennium Prize Problems in mathematics.) [ 29 ] Quantum field theory (this is a generalization of the previous problem): Is it possible to construct, in a mathematically rigorous way, a quantum field theory in 4-dimensional spacetime that includes interactions and does not resort to perturbative methods ? Cosmology and general relativity [ edit ] Cosmic inflation : Is the theory of cosmic inflation in the very early universe correct, and, if so, what are the details of this epoch? What is the hypothetical inflaton scalar field that gave rise to this cosmic inflation? If inflation happened at one point, is it self-sustaining through inflation of quantum-mechanical fluctuations , and thus ongoing in some extremely distant place? [ 30 ] Cosmic coincidence problem : the energy densities of dark energy and dark matter are of the same order of magnitude in the Universe. Dark matter energy density decreased during the evolution of the universe, so it must have been very large in the past. Is there any relation between the two energy densities? [ 31 ] [ 32 ] Horizon problem : Why is the distant universe so homogeneous when the Big Bang theory seems to predict larger measurable anisotropies of the night sky than those observed? Cosmological inflation is generally accepted as the solution, but are other possible explanations such as a variable speed of light more appropriate? [ 33 ] Origin and future of the universe : How did the conditions for anything to exist arise? Is the universe heading towards a Big Freeze , a Big Rip , a Big Crunch , or a Big Bounce ? Size of universe : The diameter of the observable universe is about 93 billion light-years (or equivalently a radius of about 14 Gpc), but what is the size of the whole universe? Is the universe infinite? Matter–antimatter asymmetry : Theoretical models suggest that the early universe should have produced equal amounts of matter and antimatter. However, observations indicate no significant primordial antimatter. Understanding the mechanisms that led to this asymmetry is a major unsolved problem in physics. [ 34 ] : 22.3.6 Cosmological principle : Is the universe homogeneous and isotropic at large enough scales, as claimed by the cosmological principle and assumed by all models that use the Friedmann–Lemaître–Robertson–Walker metric , including the current version of the ΛCDM model , or is the universe inhomogeneous or anisotropic? [ 35 ] Is the CMB dipole purely kinematic, or does it signal anisotropy of the universe, resulting in the breakdown of the FLRW metric and the cosmological principle? [ 35 ] Is the Hubble tension evidence that the cosmological principle is false? [ 35 ] Even if the cosmological principle is correct, is the Friedmann–Lemaître–Robertson–Walker metric the right metric to use for our universe? [ 36 ] [ 35 ] Are the observations usually interpreted as the accelerating expansion of the universe rightly interpreted, or are they instead evidence that the cosmological principle is false? [ 37 ] [ 38 ] Cosmological constant problem : Why does the zero-point energy of the vacuum not cause a large cosmological constant ? What cancels it out? [ 39 ] [ 40 ] Estimated distribution of dark matter and dark energy in the universe Dark matter : What is the identity of dark matter? [ 33 ] Is it a particle ? If so, is it a WIMP , axion , the lightest superpartner (LSP), or some other particle? Or, are the phenomena attributed to dark matter the result of an alternate theory of gravity separate from general relativity altogether? Despite extensive research, the exact composition of dark matter remains unknown. It is inferred from gravitational effects on visible matter, radiation, and the universe's large-scale structure. Understanding its properties is crucial for a comprehensive understanding of the universe. Dark energy : What is the cause of the observed accelerating expansion of the universe (the de Sitter phase )? Are the observations rightly interpreted as the accelerating expansion of the universe , or are they evidence that the cosmological principle is false? [ 37 ] [ 38 ] Why is the energy density of the dark energy component of the same magnitude as the density of matter at present when the two evolve quite differently over time; could it be simply that we are observing at exactly the right time ? Is dark energy a pure cosmological constant or are models of quintessence such as phantom energy applicable? Dark flow : Is a non-spherically-symmetric gravitational pull from outside the observable universe responsible for some of the observed motion of large objects such as galactic clusters in the universe? Shape of the universe : What is the 3- manifold of comoving space , i.e., of a comoving spatial section of the universe, informally called the "shape" of the universe? Neither the curvature nor the topology is presently known, though the curvature is known to be "close" to zero on observable scales. Is the shape unmeasurable; the Poincaré space; or another 3-manifold? [ citation needed ] Extra dimensions : Does nature have more than four spacetime dimensions? If so, what is their size? Are dimensions a fundamental property of the universe or an emergent result of other physical laws? Can we experimentally observe evidence of higher spatial dimensions? [ citation needed ] Hubble tension : The value of H 0 , which encodes the current expansion rate of the universe, has two values: one from near-universe measurements and one from cosmic microwave background measurements combined with the Lambda-CDM model . These two values disagree to a high degree of statistical confidence (5.7σ). Are there systematic measurement errors? A problem in the otherwise widely successful model? [ 41 ] High-energy/particle physics [ edit ] See also: Physics beyond the Standard Model Hierarchy problem : The ratio between the strong force and gravity is on the order of 10 −20 . Why is gravity so much weaker than the strong force ? [ 42 ] Magnetic monopoles : Did particles that carry "magnetic charge" exist in some past, higher-energy epoch? If so, do any remain today? ( Paul Dirac showed the existence of some types of magnetic monopoles would explain charge quantization .) [ 43 ] Neutron lifetime puzzle : While the neutron lifetime has been studied for decades, there currently exists a lack of consilience on its exact value, due to different results from two experimental methods ("bottle" versus "beam"). [ 44 ] Proton decay and spin crisis : Is the proton fundamentally stable? Or does it decay with a finite lifetime as predicted by some extensions to the standard model? [ 45 ] How do the quarks and gluons carry the spin of protons? [ 46 ] Grand Unification: Are the electromagnetic and nuclear forces different aspects of a Grand Unified Theory ? If so, what symmetry governs this force and its behaviours? [ 47 ] Supersymmetry : Is spacetime supersymmetry realized at TeV scale? If so, what is the mechanism of supersymmetry breaking? Does supersymmetry stabilize the electroweak scale, preventing high quantum corrections? Does the lightest supersymmetric particle ( LSP ) comprise dark matter ? Color confinement : The quantum chromodynamics (QCD) color confinement conjecture is that color-charged particles (such as quarks and gluons) cannot be separated from their parent hadron without producing new hadrons. [ 48 ] Is it possible to provide an analytic proof of color confinement in any non- abelian gauge theory ? Colour Confinement is the observed phenomenon that colored particles (quarks and gluons) cannot be isolated and are always bound to color neutral groups (at low energies). Such bound states are generally called hadrons. The QCD vacuum : Many of the equations in non-perturbative QCD are currently unsolved. These energies are the energies sufficient for the formation and description of atomic nuclei . How thus does low energy /non-pertubative QCD give rise to the formation of complex nuclei and nuclear constituents? [ citation needed ] Generations of matter : Why are there three generations of quarks and leptons ? Is there a theory that can explain the masses of particular quarks and leptons in particular generations from first principles (a theory of Yukawa couplings )? [ 49 ] Neutrino mass : What is the absolute mass of neutrinos? Are they Dirac or Majorana fermions? Is the mass hierarchy normal or inverted? Is the CP violating phase equal to 0? [ 50 ] [ 51 ] Reactor antineutrino anomaly: There is an anomaly in the existing body of data regarding the antineutrino flux from nuclear reactors around the world. Measured values of this flux appears to be only 94% of the value expected from theory. [ 52 ] It is unknown whether this is due to unknown physics (such as sterile neutrinos ), experimental error in the measurements, or errors in the theoretical flux calculations. [ 53 ] Strong CP problem and axions : Why is the strong nuclear interaction invariant to parity and charge conjugation ? Is Peccei–Quinn theory the solution to this problem? Could axions be the main component of dark matter ? Anomalous magnetic dipole moment : Why is the experimentally measured value of the muon 's anomalous magnetic dipole moment ("muon g − 2 ") significantly different from the theoretically predicted value of that physical constant? [ 54 ] Pentaquarks and other exotic hadrons : What combinations of quarks are possible? [ 55 ] Are they a tightly bound system of five elementary particles, or a more weakly-bound pairing of a baryon and a meson ? [ 56 ] Mu problem : A problem in supersymmetric theories, concerned with understanding the reasons for parameter values of the theory. Koide formula : An aspect of the problem of particle generations . The sum of the masses of the three charged leptons , divided by the square of the sum of the roots of these masses, to within one standard deviation of observations, is Q = 2 ⁄ 3 . It is unknown how such a simple value comes about, and why it is the exact arithmetic average of the possible extreme values of ⁠ 1 / 3 ⁠ (equal masses) and 1 (one mass dominates). Strange matter : Does strange matter exist? Is it stable? Can they form Strange stars ? Is strange matter stable at 0 pressure (i.e. in the vacuum)? Glueballs : Do they exist in nature? Gallium anomaly : The measurements of the charged-current capture rate of neutrinos on Ga from strong radioactive sources have yielded results below those expected, based on the known strength of the principal transition supplemented by theory. [ 57 ] Astronomy and astrophysics [ edit ] Main article: List of unsolved problems in astronomy Solar cycle : How does the Sun generate its periodically reversing large-scale magnetic field? How do other solar-like stars generate their magnetic fields, and what are the similarities and differences between stellar activity cycles and that of the Sun? [ 58 ] What caused the Maunder Minimum and other grand minima, and how does the solar cycle recover from a minima state? Coronal heating problem : Why is the Sun's corona (atmosphere layer) so much hotter than the Sun's surface? Why is the magnetic reconnection effect many orders of magnitude faster than predicted by standard models? Astrophysical jet : Why do only certain accretion discs surrounding certain astronomical objects emit relativistic jets along their polar axes? Why are there quasi-periodic oscillations in many accretion discs? [ 59 ] Why does the period of these oscillations scale as the inverse of the mass of the central object? [ 60 ] Why are there sometimes overtones, and why do these appear at different frequency ratios in different objects? [ 61 ] Diffuse interstellar bands : What is resp