Great Debates (international relations) - Wikipedia Jump to content From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Disagreements between IR scholars International relations theory Constructivism Feminist constructivism Liberalism Idealism Democratic peace theory Capitalist peace Republican liberalism Liberal institutionalism Marxism Dependency theory Theories of imperialism Uneven and combined development World-systems theory Realism Classical realism Neoclassical realism Neorealism Offensive realism Defensive realism Territorial peace theory Democratic peace theory Realpolitik Other theories Bargaining model of war Chinese school of international relations Copenhagen School Critical security studies Critical theory English School Feminism Functionalism ( neofunctionalism ) Green theory Hegemonic stability theory Intercommunalism Intergovernmentalism ( liberal intergovernmentalism ) International political economy Neo-Gramscianism Postcolonialism Postmodernism Security dilemma Self-defence in international law Youth bulge theory Classifications Postpositivism Rationalism Reflectivism " Great Debates " Inter-paradigm debate Other approaches International ethics Historical sociology Regime theory State cartel theory Geopolitics Scholars Michael Barnett Zbigniew Brzezinski Hedley Bull E. H. Carr Robert Cox Daniel Deudney Michael W. Doyle Cynthia Enloe James Fearon Martha Finnemore Robert Gilpin Samuel P. Huntington John Ikenberry Robert Jervis Peter J. Katzenstein Robert Keohane Henry Kissinger Stephen D. Krasner John Mearsheimer Hans Morgenthau Joseph Nye Kathryn Sikkink Susan Strange J. Ann Tickner Immanuel Wallerstein Stephen Walt Kenneth Waltz Alexander Wendt Yan Xuetong Qin Yaqing Categories International relations Politics portal v t e In international relations theory , the Great Debates are a series of disagreements between international relations scholars. [ 1 ] Ashworth describes how the discipline of international relations has been heavily influenced by historical narratives and that "no single idea has been more influential" than the notion that there was a debate between utopian and realist thinking. [ 2 ] First Great Debate [ edit ] Further information: Liberalism in international relations theory , Idealism in international relations , and Realism in international relations The "First Great Debate" also known as the "Realist-Idealist Great Debate" [ 3 ] was a dispute between idealists and realists which took place in the 1920s and 1930s [ 4 ] and which was fundamentally about how to deal with Nazi Germany . [ 5 ] Realist scholars emphasized the anarchical nature of international politics and the need for state survival. Idealists emphasized the possibility of international institutions such as the League of Nations. However, some have argued that defining the debate between realism and idealism in terms of a great debate is a misleading caricature and so described the "great debate" as a myth. [ 6 ] [ 7 ] According to revisionist narrative, [ 8 ] [ 9 ] there was never a single 'great debate' between idealism and realism. Lucian M. Ashworth argues, the persistence of the notion that there was a real debate between idealism and realism says less about the actual discussions of the time, and more about the marginalisation of liberal and normative thinking in international relations in the post-war period. [ 9 ] Richard Devetak wrote in his international relations textbook: The structure of Carr ’s masterpiece revolves around the dichotomy between realism and liberalism. In fact, he helped create the impression that the newly established discipline was dominated by a debate between realism and liberalism. This subsequently became known as the ‘first great debate’, although – as Andreas Osiander (1998), Peter Wilson (1998), Lucian Ashworth (1999), and Quirk and Vigneswaran (2005) have shown – no debate actually occurred, if by that we mean a series of exchanges between realists and liberals. Indeed, recent work suggests that the very idea of narrating the discipline’s history as a series of ‘great debates’ is questionable. Even so, it is important for students to learn and appreciate the stories the discipline has told about itself, which is why I persist with the narrative. [ 10 ] Second Great Debate [ edit ] The "Second Great Debate" was a dispute between "scientific IR" scholars who sought to refine scientific methods of inquiry in international relations theory and those who insisted on a more historicist/interpretative approach to international relations theory. The debate is termed "realists versus behaviourists" or "traditionalism versus scientism". [ 11 ] This debate would be resolved when neorealists such as Kenneth Waltz (1959, 1979) adopt a Behaviouralist, and hence positivist scientific approach to their studies. Third Great Debate [ edit ] The "Third Great Debate" refers to the interparadigm debate between proponents of liberalist , realist and Marxist international relations theories, [ 12 ] as well as the academic debate between proponents of realism, institutionalism and structuralism. [ citation needed ] This debate was topical during the 1970s and 1980s. [ 13 ] Criticism [ edit ] Some scholars have lamented the so-called "paradigm wars", particularly between (neo)realism and (neo)liberalism. Jack S. Levy argues that while the realism-liberalism debate “has imposed some order on a chaotic field,” the distinction ignores diversity within each of the two camps and inhibits attempts at synthesis. Levy suggests instead focusing on making testable predictions and leaving “the question of whether a particular approach fits into a liberal or realist framework to the intellectual historians.” [ 14 ] Bear F. Braumoeller likewise proposes that the “temporary theoretical convenience” of separating realism and liberalism “was transformed into ossified ontology” that inhibited attempts at theoretical synthesis. Socialization also leads to a situation where “scholars working primarily within one paradigm who attempt [to combine paradigms] are likely to be chastised for theoretical impurity.” [ 15 ] Fourth Great Debate [ edit ] Further information: Post-positivism in international relations theory The "Fourth Great Debate" was a debate between positivist theories and post-positivist theories of international relations. Confusingly, it is often described in literature as "The Third Great Debate" by those who reject the description of the inter-paradigm debate as a Great Debate. [ 16 ] This debate is concerned with the underlying epistemology of international relations scholarship and is also described as a debate between " rationalists " and " reflectivists ". [ 17 ] The debate was started by Robert Keohane in an International Studies Association debate in 1988 and can be considered an epistemological debate, about how we can know 'things' rather than an ontological one, [ 18 ] that is to say, a debate about what we can claim to know. As Balzacq and Baele summarize, this debate is "a discussion which, in the 1980s and 1990s, followed a composite claim for a more diverse, less epistemologically and ontologically naïve, and more critical IR". [ 19 ] Fifth Great Debate [ edit ] The "Fifth Great Debate" is the most recent debate that emerged in the 2010s and is centered around how to respond to the challenges posed by global inequality, climate change, and other transnational issues that require collective action. On one side of the debate are the globalists, who argue that the solution to these challenges lies in greater cooperation and integration among nations and the development of a more robust system of global governance. Globalists believe that international institutions, such as the United Nations and the International Monetary Fund, should be strengthened and given more authority to address global issues. [ 20 ] One of its representatives, Emilian Kavalski, has made significant contributions to the field of complexity theory, particularly in the areas of global governance and the decentralization of international relations theory and practice, which relates to the growing prominence of non-Western (especially Asian) international actors and the noticeable impact of global climate change. [ 21 ] In particular, he explores the nascent Asian normative orders, how they confront, complement, and transform established traditions, norms, and institutions, and the encounter of international relations with life in the Anthropocene, especially the conceptualization of and engagement with non-human actors. [ 20 ] Kavalski contends that in both these areas, the concept and practices of relationality have essential implications for how global life is approached, explained, and understood. [ 22 ] See also [ edit ] Rationalist–constructivist debate References [ edit ] ↑ Ken Booth, Michael Cox, Timothy Dunne, The eighty years' crisis: international relations 1919-1999, Issue 1, p1: "The story of international relations is conveniently told in a series of 'great debates'. ↑ LM Ashworth, Did the Realist-Idealist Great Debate Really Happen? a Revisionist History of International Relations, International Relations, Vol. 16, No. 1, p31 (2002) ↑ LM Ashworth, Did the Realist-Idealist Great Debate Really Happen? a Revisionist History of International Relations, International Relations, Vol. 16, No. 1, 33-51 (2002) ↑ Ken Booth, Michael Cox, Timothy Dunne, The eighty years' crisis: international relations 1919-1999, Issue 1, p1 ↑ Richard Devetak, Anthony Burke, Jim George (2007) An Introduction to International Relations: Australian Perspectives , Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, p. 90 ↑ Vigneswaran, Darsha, International relations’ first great debate: context and tradition. ISBN 0 7315 3133 7 , p5 ↑ Peter Wilson (1998). The myth of the ‘First Great Debate’. Review of International Studies, 24, pp 1-16 ↑ Wilson, P. (1998) 'The Myth of the "First Great Debate"', Review of International Studies , 24: 1–15. 1 2 Ashworth, Lucian M. (2002). "Did the Realist-Idealist Great Debate Really Happen? A Revisionist History of International Relations" . International Relations . 16 : 33– 51. doi : 10.1177/0047117802016001004 . ↑ Devetak, R., George, J., Percy, S. (eds.). (2017). An Introduction to International Relations . Cambridge University Press, p. 13 ↑ Guzzini, Stefano (1998) Realism in international relations and international political economy: the continuing story of a death foretold, New York: Routledge, P. 32 ↑ Weaver, Ole, The rise and fall of the Inter-paradigm debate, International theory: positivism and beyond, Steve Smith, Ken Booth, Marysia Zalewski, p151 ↑ "Oxford University Press | Online Resource Centre | Chapter 01" . Archived from the original on 2008-11-22 . Retrieved 2021-10-20 . ↑ Levy, Jack S. (Jun 1998). "The Causes of War and the Conditions of Peace" . Annual Review of Political Science . 1 : 139– 165. doi : 10.1146/annurev.polisci.1.1.139 . ↑ Braumoeller, Bear F. (2009). "Rediscovering Complexity and Synthesis" (PDF) . The Future of Political Science: 100 Perspectives (1 ed.). New York: Routledge Press. ISBN 978-0415997010 . ↑ Y Lapid, The third debate: On the prospects of international theory in a post-positivist era, International Studies Quarterly (1989) 33, 235–254 ↑ Smith, Steve (2007) "Introduction" in T. Dunne. M. Kuki, and S. Smith (eds.) International Relations Theories: Discipline and Diversity. Oxford: Oxford University Press. p. 10 ↑ Smith, S, (2007) 'Introduction' in Dunne, T., Kuki, M. and Smith, S. (eds.) International Relations Theories: Discipline and Diversity . Oxford: OUP. p. 5 ↑ "The Third Debate and Postpositivism: The International Studies Encyclopedia: Blackwell Reference Online" . www.blackwellreference.com . Retrieved 2016-12-12 . 1 2 Pietrzak, Piotr (2024), "The Sixth Great Debate in International Relations Theory Revolves Around Clarity: Ontology in Statu Nascendi as a Cutting-Edge Tool for Conflict Management" , Dealing With Regional Conflicts of Global Importance , IGI Global Scientific Publishing, pp. 1– 27, ISBN 978-1-6684-9467-7 , retrieved 2025-01-31 ↑ Kunwar, Rajeev (2025-01-23). "Fifth Debate in International Relations Theory or an Enduring Grandeur | Global South Colloquy" . Retrieved 2025-01-31 . ↑ "The fifth debate and the emergence of complex international relations theory: Notes on the application of complexity theory to the study of international life" . University of Nottingham Ningbo China . Retrieved 2025-01-31 . Further reading [ edit ] Darshan Vigneswaran, Joel Quirk, International relations' first great debate: context and tradition, Issue 2001; Issue 2004 of Working paper, Dept. of International Relations, Research School of Pacific and Asian Studies, Australian National University , 2004. Mohamed Hamchi, "IR Fourth Debate: Pluralistic or Hegemonic? Limitations to Bridging the Gap," Algerian Review of Security and Development , Issue 1, July 2011. v t e International relations theory Constructivism Feminist constructivism Liberalism Idealism Democratic peace theory Capitalist peace Republican liberalism Liberal institutionalism Marxism Dependency theory Theories of imperialism Uneven and combined development World-systems theory Realism Classical realism Neoclassical realism Neorealism Offensive realism Defensive realism Territorial peace theory Democratic peace theory Realpolitik Other theories Bargaining model of war Chinese school of international relations Copenhagen School Critical security studies Critical theory English School Feminism Functionalism ( neofunctionalism ) Green theory Hegemonic stability theory Intercommunalism Intergovernmentalism ( liberal intergovernmentalism ) International political economy Neo-Gramscianism Postcolonialism Postmodernism Security dilemma Self-defence in international law Youth bulge theory Classifications Postpositivism Rationalism Reflectivism " Great Debates " Inter-paradigm debate Other approaches International ethics Historical sociology Regime theory State cartel theory Geopolitics Scholars Michael Barnett Zbigniew Brzezinski Hedley Bull E. H. Carr Robert Cox Daniel Deudney Michael W. Doyle Cynthia Enloe James Fearon Martha Finnemore Robert Gilpin Samuel P. Huntington John Ikenberry Robert Jervis Peter J. Katzenstein Robert Keohane Henry Kissinger Stephen D. Krasner John Mearsheimer Hans Morgenthau Joseph Nye Kathryn Sikkink Susan Strange J. Ann Tickner Immanuel Wallerstein Stephen Walt Kenneth Waltz Alexander Wendt Yan Xuetong Qin Yaqing Categories International relations Politics portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Great_Debates_(international_relations) oldid=1360680524 " Categories : International relations theory Political debates Political realism Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2021 Search Search Great Debates (international relations) 7 languages Add topic