High Road (Mastodon song) - Wikipedia Jump to content From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 2014 single by Mastodon "High Road" Single by Mastodon from the album Once More 'Round the Sun Released April 17, 2014 Recorded Rock Falcon Studios, Franklin, Tennessee Genre Progressive metal sludge metal Length 4 : 15 Label Reprise Songwriter Troy Sanders Producer Nick Raskulinecz Mastodon singles chronology "Dry Bone Valley" (2012) " High Road " (2014) "Chimes at Midnight" (2014) " High Road " is a song by the American heavy metal band Mastodon , released as the debut single from their sixth studio album, Once More 'Round the Sun (2014). The song was nominated for a Grammy Award for Best Metal Performance , but lost to Tenacious D 's cover of Dio 's " The Last in Line ." Composition [ edit ] "High Road" is the heaviest song on Once More 'Round the Sun , but is still more melodic than the band's previous work. J.F. Williams of Angry Metal Guy described its sound as " prog - sludge Foo Fighters ." [ 1 ] Music video [ edit ] The song's official music video was uploaded to the band's YouTube channel on June 11, 2014. The video was directed by Roboshobo. The video begins with a teenage boy watching two scantly dressed women play a game of chess, while he sits on a throne. As the two women are about to kiss, the boy wakes up and is handed a lunch by his grandmother, who is carrying around an oxygen tank. The boy leaves his house, while receiving a dirty look from his neighbor across the street. The boy is then shown playing the Pathfinder Roleplaying Game with his grandma, before giving her her nightly medicine. The boy goes to a park to play a live version of D D , where his team promptly loses. The opposing team shows up to his house, burning an effigy of his character. The neighbor from before puts out the fire and shows the boy his garage and helps him get "in shape". The boy returns to the park and wins this time, but is attacked by the same boys from earlier. The neighbor shows up and fends off the attackers; as the video ends both the boy and neighbor are shown lying on the ground. Track listing [ edit ] "High Road" – 4:15 Chart positions [ edit ] Weekly chart performance for "High Road" Chart (2014) Peak position US Hot Singles Sales ( Billboard ) [ 2 ] 1 US Mainstream Rock ( Billboard ) [ 3 ] 24 Mexico Airplay ( Monitor Latino ) [ 4 ] 41 Personnel [ edit ] Troy Sanders – lead vocals, bass guitar Brent Hinds – guitar, chorus backing vocals Bill Kelliher – guitar, chorus backing vocals (live) Brann Dailor – lead vocals, drums References [ edit ] ↑ Williams, J. F. (June 25, 2014). "Mastodon - Once More 'Round the Sun Review" . Angry Metal Guy . Retrieved August 6, 2026 . Even its heaviest track – the single "High Road" – goes nowhere near the tar-black heave that once was Mastodon's signature. Instead, it stomps something like a prog-sludge Foo Fighters. ↑ " Mastodon Chart History (Hot Singles Sales) ". Billboard . Archived from the original . Retrieved October 8, 2014. [ dead link ] ↑ " Mastodon Chart History (Mainstream Rock) ". Billboard . Retrieved October 8, 2014. ↑ " Top 20 México música ". Monitor Latino. Retrieved October 8, 2014. External links [ edit ] Official Music Video on YouTube v t e Mastodon Brann Dailor Bill Kelliher Troy Sanders João Nogueira Nick Johnston Brent Hinds Studio albums Remission Leviathan Blood Mountain Crack the Skye The Hunter Once More 'Round the Sun Emperor of Sand Hushed and Grim Marrow Deep Live albums Live at the Aragon Live at Brixton Compilation albums Call of the Mastodon Mastodon box set Medium Rarities Video albums The Workhorse Chronicles Extended plays Lifesblood March of the Fire Ants EP Oblivion EP Jonah Hex: Revenge Gets Ugly EP Cold Dark Place Singles " Colony of Birchmen " " Oblivion " " Curl of the Burl " " High Road " " The Motherload " " Show Yourself " " Steambreather " Concert tours Blackdiamondskye Heritage Hunter Tour Related articles Discography Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=High_Road_(Mastodon_song) oldid=1369620422 " Categories : 2014 songs 2014 singles Reprise Records singles Mastodon (band) songs Song recordings produced by Nick Raskulinecz Hidden categories: Use mdy dates from August 2026 Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with hAudio microformats All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from November 2021 Single chart usages for Billboardsinglessales Single chart used with defunct chart Single chart usages for Billboardmainstreamrock Single chart usages for Mexico ML Search Search High Road (Mastodon song) 1 language Add topic