Alternate history - Wikipedia Jump to content From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Not to be confused with Counterfactual history , Pseudohistory , or Alternate Histories . This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page . ( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article is written like a personal reflection, personal essay, or argumentative essay that states a Wikipedia editor's personal feelings or presents an original argument about a topic. Please help improve it by rewriting it in an encyclopedic style . ( June 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article needs more citations . Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed . Find sources: "Alternate history" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( June 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A painting by Jakub Różalski depicts an alternative history of the 1920s in Scythe , in which rural peasants must contend with giant mechanical walking tanks. Part of a series on Alternate history People L. Sprague de Camp Virginia DeMarce Philip K. Dick Eric Flint Robert Harris Harry Harrison Murray Leinster Thomas More S. M. Stirling Eric G. Swedin Harry Turtledove Elements Alien space bats American Civil War Butterfly effect Hypothetical Axis victory Multiple universes Parallel timeline Point of divergence Retrofuturism Time travel Related topics Counterfactual history Fantasy Historical fiction Science fiction Sidewise Award for Alternate History Speculative fiction Speculative fiction portal History portal v t e Speculative fiction Alternate history List of alternate history fiction Retrofuturism Sidewise Award Writers Fantasy fiction Anime Fandom Fantasy art Fiction magazines Films Genres History Early history Legendary creatures Literature Podcasts Quests Magic Superheroes Television Worlds Writers Science fiction Anime Artists Awards Climate fiction Editors Fandom Conventions Fanzine Fiction magazines Genres History Timeline Organizations Podcasts Film Television Themes Writers Horror fiction Anime Awards Conventions Fiction magazines Films History Genres Podcasts Television Writers Miscellaneous Fictional universe Fictional species Internet Speculative Fiction Database List of Japanese SF writers The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction The Encyclopedia of Fantasy Portal v t e Alternate history (also alternative history , allohistory , [ 1 ] althist , or simply A.H. ) is a subgenre of speculative fiction in which one or more historical events happen differently than they did in reality. [ 2 ] As conjecture grounded in historical fact, alternate history stories explore "what if?" scenarios about pivotal events in human history and depict outcomes diverge significantly from the historical record. These works typically feature a point of divergence (POD) from recorded history, a change that alters the subsequent course of events, and the resulting ramifications. [ 3 ] Some alternate histories are considered a subgenre of science fiction or historical fiction . Since the 1950s, many works in the genre have incorporated tropes such as time travel between timelines, psychic awareness of parallel universes , or the splitting of history into separate timestreams . [ 4 ] Definition [ edit ] Alternate history (also called alternative history ) is a genre of speculative fiction in which one or more historical events occur differently from how they did in actual history. [ 5 ] The genre commonly explores "what if" scenarios involving pivotal points in human history . An alternate history generally requires three elements: A point of divergence (often abbreviated as PoD) from the historical record, occurring at a time before the story is written; A change that would alter the subsequent course of history; and An examination of the consequences or ramifications of that divergence. [ 6 ] Works of fiction set in the past or present, but written before that time period - such as the novels 2001: A Space Odyssey (1968) by Arthur C. Clarke and 1984 (1949) by George Orwell , or the film 2012 (2009) - are sometimes mistakenly identified as alternate history. These works do not diverge from the historical record as it was known at the time of their creation. [ 6 ] Alternative history is similar to but distinct from secret history, which can be either fictional or non-fictional and recounts events that occurred in history (whether real or imagined) but which had no apparent effect on the recorded historical outcome. [ 6 ] [ 7 ] It is also thematically related to, but distinct from, counterfactual history , which is a form of historiography that explores what might have happened in order to better understand why events unfolded as they actually did. [ 8 ] [ 9 ] History of literature [ edit ] This section has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page . ( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This section may contain excessive or irrelevant examples . Please help improve it by removing less pertinent examples and elaborating on existing ones. ( May 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This section may contain original research . Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed. ( May 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Antiquity and medieval [ edit ] Title page of the first Spanish-language translation of Joanot Martorell 's Tirant lo Blanch (originally in Catalan) Speculative and counterfactual thinking about historical events appears in some of the earliest works of Western historiography. One of the earliest known examples is found in the Roman historian Livy 's Ab Urbe Condita Libri (Book IX, sections 17–19). Livy contemplated an alternative 4th century BC in which Alexander the Great had survived to invade Europe as planned. He asks what would have happened if Rome had faced Alexander in war and concludes that the Romans would likely have defeated him. [ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] [ 13 ] [ 14 ] An even earlier instance of speculative material appears in Herodotus 's Histories . [ 15 ] In the 11th century, the theologian and Doctor of the Church Peter Damian explored a philosophical form of counterfactual speculation in his work De Divina Omnipotentia . While discussing the limits of God 's omnipotence , he considered whether God could alter past events, such as making it so that Rome had never been founded. [ 16 ] [ 17 ] [ 18 ] [ 19 ] One of the earliest works of fiction with clear alternate-history elements is Joanot Martorell 's 1490 epic romance Tirant lo Blanch . Written when the fall of Constantinople to the Turks was still a recent and traumatic memory for Christian Europe , the novel depicts a Breton knight, Tirant, who aids the remnants of the Byzantine Empire and successfully repels the invading Ottoman forces of Mehmet II , preventing the city's fall to Islamic conquest. 19th century [ edit ] One of the earliest works of alternate history to reach a large audience was Louis Geoffroy 's Histoire de la Monarchie universelle: Napoléon et la conquête du monde (1812–1832) ( History of the Universal Monarchy: Napoleon and the Conquest of the World ) (1836). The novel imagines Napoleon 's First French Empire victorious in the French invasion of Russia (1812) and in an invasion of England in 1814, eventually unifying the world under Bonaparte's rule. [ 10 ] In English, the first known complete alternate history is Nathaniel Hawthorne 's short story " P.'s Correspondence ", published in 1845. It depicts a man deemed mad for perceiving a different 1845 in which long-dead figures, including poets Robert Burns , Lord Byron , Percy Bysshe Shelley , and John Keats , actor Edmund Kean , British politician George Canning , and Napoleon , are still alive. The first novel-length alternate history in English is Castello Holford 's Aristopia (1895). Unlike the nationalistic tone of Geoffroy's work, Aristopia portrays a utopian society: the earliest settlers in Virginia discover a reef of solid gold and are able to build a Utopian society in North America . [ 10 ] Early 20th century and the era of the pulps [ edit ] In 1905, H. G. Wells published A Modern Utopia . As explicitly noted in the book itself, Wells's main aim in writing it was to set out his social and political ideas, the plot serving mainly as a vehicle to expound them. This book introduced the idea of a person being transported from a point in our familiar world to the precise geographical equivalent point in an alternate world in which history had gone differently. The protagonists undergo various adventures in the alternate world, and then are finally transported back to our world, again to the precise geographical equivalent point. Since then, that has become a staple of the alternate history genre. A number of alternate history stories and novels appeared in the late 19th and early 20th centuries (see, for example, Joseph Edgar Chamberlin 's The Ifs of History [1907] and Charles Petrie 's If: A Jacobite Fantasy [1926]). [ 20 ] In 1931, British historian Sir John Squire collected a series of essays from some of the leading historians of the period for his anthology If It Had Happened Otherwise . In that work, scholars from major universities, as well as important non-academic authors, turned their attention to such questions as "If the Moors in Spain Had Won" and "If Louis XVI Had Had an Atom of Firmness". The essays range from serious scholarly efforts to Hendrik Willem van Loon 's fanciful and satiric portrayal of an independent 20th-century New Amsterdam , a Dutch city-state on the island of Manhattan . Among the authors included were Hilaire Belloc , André Maurois , and Winston Churchill . One of the entries in Squire's volume was Churchill's " If Lee Had Not Won the Battle of Gettysburg ", written from the viewpoint of a historian in a world in which the Confederacy had won the American Civil War . The entry considers what would have happened if the North had been victorious (in other words, a character from an alternate world imagines a world more like the real one we live in, although it is not identical in every detail). Speculative work that narrates from the point of view of an alternate history is variously known as " recursive alternate history ", a "double-blind what-if", or an "alternate-alternate history". [ 21 ] Churchill's essay was one of the influences behind Ward Moore 's alternate history novel Bring the Jubilee [ citation needed ] in which General Robert E. Lee won the Battle of Gettysburg and paved the way for the eventual victory of the Confederacy in the American Civil War (named the "War of Southron Independence" in this timeline). The protagonist, the autodidact Hodgins Backmaker, travels back to the aforementioned battle and inadvertently changes history, which results in the emergence of our own timeline and the consequent victory of the Union instead. The American humorist author James Thurber parodied alternate history stories about the American Civil War in his 1930 story "If Grant Had Been Drinking at Appomattox", which he accompanied with this very brief introduction: " Scribner's magazine is publishing a series of three articles: 'If Booth Had Missed Lincoln', 'If Lee Had Won the Battle of Gettysburg', and 'If Napoleon Had Escaped to America'. This is the fourth". Another example of alternate history from this period (and arguably [ 22 ] the first that explicitly posited cross-time travel from one universe to another as anything more than a visionary experience) is H.G. Wells ' Men Like Gods (1923) in which the London -based journalist Mr. Barnstable, along with two cars and their passengers, is mysteriously teleported into "another world", which the "Earthlings" call Utopia. Being far more advanced than Earth, Utopia is some 3000 years ahead of humanity in its development. Wells describes a multiverse of alternative worlds, complete with the paratime travel machines that would later become popular with American pulp writers. However, since his hero experiences only a single alternate world, the story is not very different from conventional alternate history. [ 23 ] In the 1930s, alternate history moved into a new arena. The December 1933 issue of Astounding published Nat Schachner 's "Ancestral Voices", which was quickly followed by Murray Leinster 's " Sidewise in Time " (1934). While earlier alternate histories examined reasonably-straightforward divergences, Leinster attempted something completely different. In his "World gone mad", pieces of Earth traded places with their analogs from different timelines. The story follows Professor Minott and his students from a fictitious Robinson College as they wander through analogues of worlds that followed a different history. [ citation needed ] "Sidewise in Time" has been described as "the point at which the alternate history narrative first enters science fiction as a plot device" and is the story for which the Sidewise Award for Alternate History is named. [ 24 ] [ 25 ] The world in 1964 in the novel Fatherland in which the Nazis won World War II . Germany and its sphere of influence are in red; the United States and its sphere of influence in blue; China and Switzerland in yellow A somewhat similar approach was taken by Robert A. Heinlein in his 1941 novelette Elsewhen in which a professor trains his mind to move his body across timelines. He then hypnotizes his students so that they can explore more of them. Eventually, each settles into the reality that is most suitable for him or her. Some of the worlds they visit are mundane, some are very odd, and others follow science fiction or fantasy conventions. World War II produced alternate history for propaganda : both British and American [ 26 ] authors wrote works depicting Nazi invasions of their respective countries as cautionary tales. Time travel to create historical divergences [ edit ] This section may contain original research . Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed. ( October 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The period around World War II also saw the publication of the time travel novel Lest Darkness Fall by L. Sprague de Camp in which an American academic travels to Italy at the time of the Byzantine invasion of the Ostrogoths . De Camp's time traveler, Martin Padway, is depicted as making permanent historical changes and implicitly forming a new time branch, thereby making the work an alternate history. In William Tenn 's short story Brooklyn Project (1948), a tyrannical US Government brushes aside the warnings of scientists about the dangers of time travel and goes on with a planned experiment - with the result that minor changes to the prehistoric past cause Humanity to never have existed, its place taken by tentacled underwater intelligent creatures - who also have a tyrannical government which also insists on experimenting with time-travel. [ 27 ] In Ray Bradbury 's classic short story " A Sound of Thunder " (1952) a group of hunters travel to the Late Cretaceous to hunt dinosaurs whose death would not be considered consequential as they are about to die a natural death within two minutes of the encounter. To minimize risking changes history they are told to stay on a levitating antigravity path that touches nothing. However one of the hunters stumbles off the path, inadvertently crushing a butterfly. When the group returns they find that history became significantly harsher and a fascist is now President. [ 28 ] Time travel as the cause of a point of divergence (POD), which can denote either the bifurcation of a historical timeline or a simple replacement of the future that existed before the time-travelling event, has continued to be a popular theme. In Ward Moore 's Bring the Jubilee (1953), the protagonist lives in an alternate history in which the Confederacy has won the American Civil War. He travels backward through time and brings about a Union victory at the Battle of Gettysburg. When a story's assumptions about the nature of time travel lead to the complete replacement of the visited time's future, rather than just the creation of an additional time line, the device of a "time patrol" is often used where guardians move through time to preserve the "correct" history. A more recent example is Making History by Stephen Fry in which a time machine is used to alter history so that Adolf Hitler was never born. That ironically results in a more competent leader of Nazi Germany and results in the country's ascendancy and longevity in the altered timeline. Quantum theory of many worlds [ edit ] This section relies on a single source . Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed . Find sources: "Alternate history" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( October 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) While many justifications for alternate histories involve a multiverse , the "many world" theory would naturally involve many worlds, in fact a continually exploding array of universes. In quantum theory, new worlds would proliferate with every quantum event, and even if the writer uses human decisions, every decision that could be made differently would result in a different timeline. A writer's fictional multiverse may, in fact, preclude some decisions as humanly impossible, as when, in Night Watch , Terry Pratchett depicts a character informing Vimes that while anything that can happen, has happened, nevertheless there is no history whatsoever in which Vimes has ever murdered his wife. When the writer explicitly maintains that all possible decisions are made in all possible ways, one possible conclusion is that the characters were neither brave, nor clever, nor skilled, but simply lucky enough to happen on the universe in which they did not choose the cowardly route, take the stupid action, fumble the crucial activity, etc.; few writers focus on this idea, although it has been explored in stories such as Larry Niven 's story All the Myriad Ways , where the reality of all possible universes leads to an epidemic of suicide and crime because people conclude their choices have no moral import. In any case, even if it is true that every possible outcome occurs in some world, it can still be argued that traits such as bravery and intelligence might still affect the relative frequency of worlds in which better or worse outcomes occurred (even if the total number of worlds with each type of outcome is infinite, it is still possible to assign a different measure to different infinite sets). The physicist David Deutsch , a strong advocate of the many-worlds interpretation of quantum mechanics, has argued along these lines, saying that "By making good choices, doing the right thing, we thicken the stack of universes in which versions of us live reasonable lives. When you succeed, all the copies of you who made the same decision succeed too. What you do for the better increases the portion of the multiverse where good things happen." [ 29 ] This view is perhaps somewhat too abstract to be explored directly in science fiction stories, but a few writers have tried, such as Greg Egan in his short story The Infinite Assassin , where an agent is trying to contain reality-scrambling "whirlpools" that form around users of a certain drug, and the agent is constantly trying to maximize the consistency of behavior among his alternate selves, attempting to compensate for events and thoughts he experiences, he guesses are of low measure relative to those