Application software - Wikipedia Jump to content From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article needs more citations . Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed . Find sources: "Application software" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( September 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Any computer program for end-user use Windows Calculator , a calculator application, running on Windows 10 Application software is software that is intended for end-user use – not operating , administering or programming a computer . It includes programs such as word processors, web browsers, media players, and mobile applications used in daily tasks. An application ( app , application program , software application ) is any program that can be categorized as application software. [ 1 ] [ 2 ] Application is a subjective classification that is often used to differentiate from system and utility software. [ 3 ] Application software represents the user-facing layer of computing systems , designed to translate complex system capabilities into task-oriented, goal-driven workflows. Unlike system software, which focuses on hardware orchestration and resource management, application software is centered on problem abstraction, user interaction, and domain-specific functionality. The abbreviation app became popular with the 2008 introduction of the iOS App Store , to refer to applications for mobile devices such as smartphones and tablets . Later, with the release of the Mac App Store in 2010 and the Windows Store in 2011, it began to be used to refer to end-user software in general, regardless of platform. [ 4 ] Applications may be bundled with the computer and its system software or published separately. Applications may be proprietary or open-source . [ 5 ] Terminology [ edit ] Meaning program and software [ edit ] When used as an adjective, application can have a broader meaning than that described in this article. [ 6 ] For example, concepts such as application programming interface (API), application server , application virtualization , application lifecycle management and portable application refer to programs and software in general. Distinction between system and application software [ edit ] The distinction between system and application software is subjective and has been the subject of controversy. [ 6 ] For example, one of the key questions in the United States v. Microsoft Corp. antitrust trial was whether Microsoft's Internet Explorer web browser was part of its Windows operating system or a separate piece of application software. As another example, the GNU/Linux naming controversy is, in part, due to disagreement about the relationship between the Linux kernel and the operating systems built over this kernel . In some types of embedded systems , the application software and the operating system software may be indistinguishable by the user, as in the case of software used to control a VCR , DVD player, or microwave oven . The above definitions may exclude some applications that may exist on some computers in large organizations. For an alternative definition of an app: see Application Portfolio Management . Killer application [ edit ] A killer application (killer app, coined in the late 1980s) is an application that is so popular that it causes demand for its host platform to increase. [ 7 ] [ 8 ] For example, VisiCalc was the first modern spreadsheet software for the Apple II and helped sell the then-new personal computers into offices. For the BlackBerry , it was its email software. Software suite [ edit ] A software suite consists of multiple applications bundled together. They usually have related functions, features, and user interfaces, and may be able to interact with each other, e.g. open each other's files. Business applications often come in suites, e.g. Microsoft Office , LibreOffice and iWork , which bundle together a word processor, a spreadsheet, etc.; but suites exist for other purposes, e.g. graphics or music. Ways to classify [ edit ] Application software on a mobile phone Source: [ 1 ] As there so many applications and since their attributes vary so dramatically, there are many different ways to classify them. By legal aspects [ edit ] Proprietary software is protected under an exclusive copyright, and a software license grants limited usage rights. Such applications may allow add-ons from third parties. Free and open-source software (FOSS) can be run, distributed, sold, and extended for any purpose. FOSS software released under a free license may be perpetual and also royalty-free . Perhaps, the owner , the holder or third-party enforcer of any right ( copyright , trademark , patent , or ius in re aliena ) are entitled to add exceptions, limitations, time decays or expiring dates to the license terms of use. Public-domain software is a type of FOSS that is royalty-free and can be run, distributed, modified, reversed [ further explanation needed ] , republished, or created in derivative works without any copyright attribution and therefore revocation . It can even be sold, but without transferring the public domain property to other single subjects. Public-domain software can be released under a (un)licensing legal statement, which enforces those terms and conditions for an indefinite duration (for a lifetime, or forever). By platform [ edit ] An application can be categorized by the host platform on which it runs. Notable platforms include operating system (native), web browser , cloud computing and mobile . For example a web application runs in a web browser whereas a more traditional, native application runs in the environment of a computer's operating system. [ 9 ] There has been a contentious debate regarding web applications replacing native applications for many purposes, especially on mobile devices such as smartphones and tablets . Web apps have indeed greatly increased in popularity for some uses, but the advantages of applications make them unlikely to disappear soon, if ever. Furthermore, the two can be complementary, and even integrated. [ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] Horizontal vs. vertical [ edit ] Application software can be seen as either horizontal or vertical . [ 13 ] [ 14 ] Horizontal applications are more popular and widespread, because they are general purpose, for example word processors or databases. Vertical applications are niche products , designed for a particular type of industry or business, or department within an organization. Integrated suites of software will try to handle every specific aspect possible of, for example, manufacturing or banking worker, accounting, or customer service. By purpose [ edit ] There are many types of application software: [ 15 ] Enterprise Addresses the needs of an entire organization's processes and data flows, across several departments, often in a large distributed environment. Examples include enterprise resource planning systems, customer relationship management (CRM) systems, data replication engines, and supply chain management software . Departmental Software is a sub-type of enterprise software with a focus on smaller organizations or groups within a large organization. (Examples include travel expense management and IT Helpdesk.) Enterprise infrastructure Provides common capabilities needed to support enterprise software systems . (Examples include databases, email servers, and systems for managing networks and security.) Application platform as a service (aPaaS) A cloud computing service that offers development and deployment environments for application services. Knowledge worker Lets users create and manage information, often for and individual media editors may aid in multiple information worker tasks. Content access Used primarily to access content without editing, but may include software that allows for content editing. Such software addresses the needs of individuals and groups to consume digital entertainment and published digital content. (Examples include media players , web browsers , and help browsers.) Educational Related to content access software, but has the content or features adapted for use by educators or students. For example, it may deliver evaluations (tests), track progress through material, or include collaborative capabilities. Simulation Simulates physical or abstract systems for either research, training, or entertainment purposes. Media development Generates print and electronic media for others to consume, most often in a commercial or educational setting. This includes graphic-art software , desktop publishing software, multimedia development software, HTML editors, digital-animation editors, digital audio and video composition, and many others. [ 16 ] Engineering Used in developing hardware and software products. This includes computer-aided design (CAD), computer-aided engineering (CAE), computer language editing and compiling tools, integrated development environments , and application programmer interfaces. Entertainment Refers to video games, screen savers, programs to display motion pictures or play recorded music, and other forms of entertainment which can be experienced through the use of a computing device. Taxonomy [ edit ] Application software for a desktop or laptop computer This section is a taxonomy of kinds of applications. This organization is but one of many different ways to organize them. A kind is included in only one category even if it logically fits in multiple. General-purpose [ edit ] Calculator Spreadsheet Web browser Web mapping E-commerce Social media Communication [ edit ] Chat Email Presentation software Phone Messages Networking software Web conferencing Documentation [ edit ] Desktop publishing software Document automation Text editor Word processor Data management [ edit ] Building information management Contact manager Content management system Database management system Digital asset management Document management Geographic information system Resource management [ edit ] Booking software Digital calendar Employee scheduling software Enterprise resource planning Event log Field service management Workforce management software File manager Productivity software Project management software Reservation systems Server management system Settings Workflow software Financial software [ edit ] Further information: Category:Financial software Banking software Clearing systems Accounting software Educational [ edit ] Further information: List of educational software Video game [ edit ] Arcade video game Console game Mobile game Personal computer game Simulation game Vehicle simulation game Simulation [ edit ] Computational science Social simulation Military simulation Flight simulator Driving simulator Media [ edit ] 3D computer graphics software Animation software Demoscene Graphic art software Raster graphics editor Vector graphics editor Image organizer Video editing software Audio editing software Digital audio workstation Music sequencer Scorewriter News Screen capturing Software art Engineering software such as Hardware engineering [ edit ] Computer-aided design Computer-aided engineering Computer-aided manufacturing Finite element analysis Software development [ edit ] Software designed and intended for software development is classified as application software even though utility software is commonly used in the process of developing software. Categories of software development application software include: Integrated development environment Game development tool HTML editor License manager Source code editor Version control See also [ edit ] Mobile app – Software application designed to run on mobile devices Server (computing) – Computer providing a central resource or service Software development – Creation and maintenance of software Super-app – Mobile application that provides multiple services including financial transactions Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Web application – Application that uses a web browser as a client References [ edit ] 1 2 "application software" . Oxford English Dictionary (online ed.). Oxford University Press. (Subscription or participating institution membership required.) ↑ R. Shirey (August 2007). Internet Security Glossary, Version 2 . Network Working Group. doi : 10.17487/RFC4949 . RFC 4949 . Informational. ↑ "Application software" . PC Magazine . Ziff Davis . ↑ Thom Holwerda (24 June 2011). "The History of 'App' and the Demise of the Programmer" . osnews.com . Retrieved 2023-01-12 . ↑ Ryan, Thorne (2013-03-14). "Caffeine and computer screens: student programmers endure weekend long appathon" . The Arbiter . Archived from the original on 2016-07-09 . Retrieved 2015-10-12 . 1 2 Ulrich, William (August 31, 2006). "Application Package Software: The Promise Vs. Reality" . Cutter Consortium . Cutter Benchmark Review. Archived from the original on 2 February 2016 . Retrieved 2023-01-12 . ↑ Dvorak, John (1989-07-01). "Looking to OS/2 for the next killer app is barking up the wrong tree. Here's where they really come from" . PC Magazine . Ziff Davis . Retrieved 2023-03-25 . ↑ "},"website":{"wt":"dictionary.com"},"access-date":{"wt":"2023-03-26"},"quote":{"wt":"Origin of killer app 1985–1990"}},"i":0}}]}'/> "killer app" . dictionary.com . Retrieved 2023-03-26 . Origin of killer app 1985–1990 ↑ "Definition of desktop application" . PCMAG . Retrieved 2022-01-07 . ↑ Gassée, Jean-Louis (2012-09-17). "The Silly Web vs. Native Apps Debate" . Archived from the original on 2016-04-15 . Retrieved 2013-07-14 . ↑ Frechette, Casey (2013-04-11). "What journalists need to know about the difference between Web apps and native apps" . Poynter . Retrieved 2017-01-04 . ↑ Valums, Andrew (2010-02-10). "Web apps vs desktop apps" . valums.com . Archived from the original on 2013-04-02 . Retrieved 2013-07-14 . ↑ "What Is a Horizontal Application?" . ↑ "What Are Horizontal Services?" . Archived from the original on 2013-10-31. ↑ "What is Application Software Its Types | eduCBA" . eduCBA . 2015-12-21 . Retrieved 2017-03-24 . ↑ Campbell-Kelly, Martin; Aspray, William (1996). Computer: A History of the Information Machine . New York: Basic Books. ISBN 0-465-02990-6 . External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Application software . Learning materials related to Application software at Wikiversity Authority control databases International GND National aplikační software /span>"}]]}'> Czech Republic Spain Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Application_software oldid=1378608614 " Categories : Application software Software by type Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from September 2025 All articles needing additional references Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles needing clarification from October 2025 Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link Commons category link from Wikidata Search Search Application software 87 languages Add topic