Consciousness Explained - Wikipedia Jump to content From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1991 book by Daniel Dennett Consciousness Explained Cover of the first edition Author Daniel C. Dennett Language English Subject Consciousness Publisher Little, Brown and Co. Publication date 1991 Publication place United States Media type Print ( hardcover and paperback ) Pages 511 ISBN 0-316-18065-3 Online Computer Library Center number /span>"}]]}'>OCLC 23648691 Dewey Decimal 126 20 Library of Congress Classification /span>"}]]}'>LC Class B105.C477 D45 1991 Preceded by The Intentional Stance Followed by Darwin's Dangerous Idea Consciousness Explained is a 1991 book by the American philosopher Daniel Dennett , in which the author offers an account of how consciousness arises from interaction of physical and cognitive processes in the brain . Dennett describes consciousness as an account of the various calculations occurring in the brain at close to the same time. He compares consciousness to an academic paper that is being developed or edited in the hands of multiple people at one time, the " multiple drafts " theory of consciousness. In this analogy, "the paper" exists even though there is no single, unified paper.
When people report on their inner experiences, Dennett considers their reports to be more like theorizing than like describing. These reports may be informative, he says, but a psychologist is not to take them at face value.
Dennett describes several phenomena that show that perception is more limited and less reliable than we perceive it to be. Dennett's views set out in Consciousness Explained put him at odds with thinkers who say that consciousness can be described only with reference to " qualia ," i.e., the raw content of experience. Critics of the book have said that Dennett is denying the existence of subjective conscious states, while giving the appearance of giving a scientific explanation of them. [ 1 ] Summary [ edit source ] Dennett puts forward a "multiple drafts" model of consciousness, suggesting that there is no single central place (a " Cartesian theater ") where conscious experience occurs; instead there are "various events of content-fixation occurring in various places at various times in the brain". [ 2 ] The brain consists of a "bundle of semi-independent agencies"; [ 3 ] when "content-fixation" takes place in one of these, its effects may propagate so that it leads to the utterance of one of the sentences that make up the story in which the central character is one's "self". Dennett's view of consciousness is that it is the apparently serial account for the brain's underlying process in which multiple calculations are happening at once (that is, parallelism ). One of Dennett's more controversial claims [ according to whom? ] is that qualia do not (and cannot) exist as qualia are described to be. Dennett's main argument is that the various properties attributed to qualia by philosophers—qualia are supposed to be incorrigible, ineffable, private, directly accessible and so on — are incompatible, so the notion of qualia is incoherent. The non-existence of qualia would mean that there is no hard problem of consciousness , and " philosophical zombies ", which are supposed to act like a human in every way while somehow lacking qualia, cannot exist. So, as Dennett wryly notes, he is committed to the belief that we are all philosophical zombies (if you define the term "philosophical zombie" as functionally identical to a human being without any additional non-material aspects)—adding that his remark should not be quoted out of context. [ 4 ] Dennett claims that our brains hold only a few salient details about the world, and that this is the only reason we are able to function at all. Thus, we do not store elaborate pictures in short-term memory, as this is not necessary and would consume valuable computing power. Rather, we log what has changed and assume the rest has stayed the same, with the result that we miss some details, as demonstrated in various experiments and illusions, some of which Dennett outlines. [ 5 ] [ 6 ] Research subsequent to Dennett's book indicates that some of his postulations were more conservative than expected. A year after Consciousness Explained was published, Dennett noted "I wish in retrospect that I'd been more daring, since the effects are stronger than I claimed". Since then, examples continue to accumulate of the illusory nature of our visual world. [ 7 ] A key philosophical method is heterophenomenology , in which the verbal or written reports of subjects are treated as akin to a theorist's fiction—the subject's report is not questioned, but it is not assumed to be an incorrigible report about that subject's inner state. This approach allows the reports of the subject to be a datum in psychological research, thus circumventing the limits of classical behaviorism . Dennett says that only a theory that explained conscious events in terms of unconscious events could explain consciousness at all: "To explain is to explain away ". [ page needed ] Reception [ edit source ] The New York Times designated Consciousness Explained as one of the ten best books of the year. [ 8 ] In New York Times Book Review , George Johnson called it "nothing short of brilliant". [ 8 ] Critics of Dennett's approach argue that Dennett fails to engage with the hard problem of consciousness by equivocating subjective experience with behaviour or cognition. In his 1996 book The Conscious Mind , philosopher David Chalmers argues that Dennett's position is "a denial" of consciousness, and jokingly wonders if Dennett is a philosophical zombie . [ 9 ] Critics believe that the book's title is misleading as it fails to actually explain consciousness. Detractors have provided the alternative titles of Consciousness Ignored and Consciousness Explained Away. [ 10 ] [ 11 ] John Searle argues [ 1 ] that Dennett, who insists that discussing subjectivity is nonsense because it is unscientific and science presupposes objectivity, is making a category error . Searle argues that the goal of science is to establish and validate statements which are epistemically objective (i.e., whose truth can be discovered and evaluated by any interested party), but these statements can be about what is ontologically subjective. Searle states that the epistemic objectivity of the scientific method does not preclude the ontological subjectivity of the subject matter. For example, pain is a subjective experience whose existence is not in doubt. One of the aims of Neurology is to understand and treat it. Searle calls any value judgment epistemically subjective. Thus, "McKinley is prettier than Everest" is epistemically subjective, whereas "McKinley is higher than Everest" is epistemically objective. In other words, the latter statement is evaluable (in fact, falsifiable) by an understood ("background") criterion for mountain height, like "the summit is so many meters above sea level". No such criteria exist for prettiness. Searle writes that, in Dennett's view, there is no consciousness in addition to the computational features, because that is all that consciousness amounts to for him: mere effects of a von Neumann(esque) virtual machine implemented in a parallel architecture and therefore implies that conscious states are illusory. In contrast, Searle asserts that, "where consciousness is concerned, the existence of the appearance is the reality." Searle wrote further: To put it as clearly as I can: in his book, Consciousness Explained , Dennett denies the existence of consciousness. He continues to use the word, but he means something different by it. For him, it refers only to third-person phenomena, not to the first-person conscious feelings and experiences we all have. For Dennett there is no difference between us humans and complex zombies who lack any inner feelings, because we are all just complex zombies. ...I regard his view as self-refuting because it denies the existence of the data which a theory of consciousness is supposed to explain...Here is the paradox of this exchange: I am a conscious reviewer consciously answering the objections of an author who gives every indication of being consciously and puzzlingly angry. I do this for a readership that I assume is conscious. How then can I take seriously his claim that consciousness does not really exist? [ 12 ] Dennett and his illusionist supporters, however, respond that the aforementioned "subjective aspect" of conscious minds is nonexistent, an unscientific remnant of commonsense " folk psychology ", and that his alleged redefinition is the only coherent description of consciousness. [ 13 ] [ 14 ] Neuroscientists such as Gerald Edelman , Antonio Damasio , Vilayanur Ramachandran , Giulio Tononi , Christof Koch and Rodolfo Llinás argue that qualia exist and that the desire to eliminate them is based on an erroneous interpretation on the part of some philosophers regarding what constitutes science. [ 15 ] See also [ edit source ] Binding problem Change blindness Homunculus argument Philosophy of mind Physicalism Scientism Society of Mind The Conscious Mind Vertiginous question Notes [ edit source ] 1 2 Searle, J R: The Mystery of Consciousness (1997) p. 95–131 ↑ Dennett 1991 , p. 365 ↑ Dennett 1991 , p. 260 ↑ Dennett 1991 , p. 406. "Are zombies possible? They're not just possible, they're actual. We're all zombies. Nobody is conscious — not in the systematically mysterious way that supports such doctrines as epiphenomenalism." In a footnote Dennett states: "It would be an act of desperate intellectual dishonesty to quote this assertion out of context!" ↑ Spinney 2000 ↑ Dennett 1991 . See e.g. chapter 5 on "Orwellian and Stalinesque Revisions". Memory is central to much of Dennett's book, with reference found throughout. ↑ Spinney 2000 , p.30 1 2 Consciousness Explained , retrieved 24 May 2021. ↑ "Chalmers, David J., The Conscious Mind, pp. 190. Oxford University Press, 1996" . global.oup.com . Retrieved 2020-08-27 . ↑ Barash 2003 ↑ Carruthers 2005 , p. 32 ↑ Searle, John R.; Dennett, Daniel C. (1995-12-21). " 'The Mystery of Consciousness': An Exchange" . New York Review of Books . ISSN 0028-7504 . Retrieved 2020-08-28 . ↑ Frankish, Keith (2016). "Illusionism as a Theory of Consciousness". Journal of Consciousness Studies . 23 : 11– 39. ↑ Graziano, Michael; Guterstam, Arvid; Bio, Branden J.; Wilterson, Andrew I. (2020). "Toward a standard model of consciousness: Reconciling the attention schema, global workspace, higher-order thought, and illusionist theories". Cognitive Neuropsychology . 37 ( 3– 4): 155– 172. doi : 10.1080/02643294.2019.1670630 . PMID 31556341 . S2CID 203441429 . ↑ Multiple sources: Damasio, A. (1999). The feeling of what happens . Harcourt Brace. Edelman, G., Gally, J. Baars, B. (2011). Biology of consciousness. Frontiers In Psychology, 2 , 4, 1-6. Edelman, G. (1992). Bright air, brilliant fire . Basic Books, p. 115. Edelman, G. (2003). Naturalizing consciousness: A theoretical framework. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 100 , 9, 5520-5524. Koch, C. (2019). The feeling of life itself . The MIT Press. Llinás, R. (2003). I of the Vortex. MIT Press, pp. 202–207. Oizumi, M., Albantakis, L., Tononi, G. (2014). From the phenomenology to the mechanisms of consciousness: Integrated information theory 3.0. PLOS Computational Biology, 10 , e1003588. Overgaard, M., Mogensen, J. Kirkeby-Hinrup, A. (Eds.) (2021). Beyond neural correlates of consciousness. Routledge Taylor Francis. Ramachandran, V. Hirstein, W. (1997). “Three laws of qualia. What neurology tells us about the biological functions of consciousness, qualia and the self.” Journal of consciousness studies, 4 (5-6), pp. 429-458. Tononi, G., Boly, M., Massimini, M., Koch, C. (2016). Integrated information theory: From consciousness to its physical substrate. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 17 , 450–461. References [ edit source ] Barash, David P. (March 22, 2003), "Dennett and the Darwinizing of Free Will" , Human Nature Review , vol. 3, pp. 222– 225, archived from the original on August 21, 2018 Carruthers, Peter (2005), Consciousness: Essays from a Higher-order Perspective , Oxford University Press, p. 247, ISBN 978-0-19-927735-3 Dennett, Daniel (1991), Allen Lane (ed.), Consciousness Explained , The Penguin Press, ISBN 978-0-7139-9037-9 Spinney, Laura (November 18, 2000), "Blind to change", New Scientist , no. 2265, pp. 29– 32 External links [ edit source ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Consciousness Explained . Dennett, Daniel (1988). Quining Qualia . Lormand, E. Qualia! (Now Showing at a Theater near You) de Leon, D. The Qualities of Qualia v t e Daniel Dennett Concepts Cartesian theater Greedy reductionism Heterophenomenology Intentional stance Intuition pump Memetics Multiple drafts model Selected works Brainstorms (1981) The Mind's I (1981) Elbow Room (1984) Consciousness Explained (1991) Darwin's Dangerous Idea (1995) Freedom Evolves (2003) Sweet Dreams (2005) Breaking the Spell (2006) From Bacteria to Bach and Back (2017) Other The Philosophical Lexicon New Atheism Universal Darwinism v t e Consciousness Figures Philosophy Alfred North Whitehead Arthur Schopenhauer Baruch Spinoza Bertrand Russell Brian O'Shaughnessy Charles Augustus Strong Christopher Peacocke Colin McGinn Daniel Dennett David Chalmers David Hume David Papineau David Pearce Donald Davidson Douglas Hofstadter Edmund Husserl Frank Jackson Fred Dretske Galen Strawson George Berkeley George Henry Lewes Georges Rey Gottfried Leibniz Immanuel Kant Jean-Paul Sartre John Eccles John Locke John Polkinghorne John Searle Joseph Levine Karl Popper Keith Frankish Kenneth M. Sayre Maurice Merleau-Ponty Max Velmans Michael Tye Martin Heidegger Ned Block Patricia Churchland Paul Churchland Philip Goff René Descartes Thomas Metzinger Thomas Nagel William Kingdon Clifford William Lycan William Seager Psychology Carl Gustav Jung Donald D. Hoffman Franz Brentano Gustav Fechner Julian Jaynes Kurt Koffka Max Wertheimer Sigmund Freud Wilhelm Wundt William James Wolfgang Köhler Neuroscience Anil Seth Antonio Damasio Benjamin Libet Bernard Baars Christof Koch Francis Crick Francisco Varela Gerald Edelman Giulio Tononi Karl Pribram Lawrence Weiskrantz Michael Gazzaniga Michael Graziano Patrick Wilken Roger Sperry Stanislas Dehaene Steven Laureys Stuart Hameroff Wolf Singer Others Annaka Harris David Bohm Eugene Wigner Erwin Schrödinger Marvin Minsky Max Planck Roger Penrose Susan Blackmore Victor J. Stenger Wolfgang Pauli Theories Philosophy of mind Anomalous monism Computationalism Double-aspect theory Eliminative materialism Emergentism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Idealism Interactionism Materialism Mind–body dualism Monism Neutral monism New mysterianism Nondualism Panpsychism Parallelism Physicalism Property dualism Reflexive monism Revisionary materialism Solipsism Type physicalism (reductive materialism, identity theory) Science Attention schema theory Consciousness causes collapse Dynamic core hypothesis Damasio's theory of consciousness Electromagnetic theories of consciousness Global workspace theory Higher-order theories of consciousness Holonomic brain theory Integrated information theory Lamme's recurrent feedback hypothesis Multiple drafts model Orchestrated objective reduction Topics Agnosia Altered state of consciousness Animal consciousness Artificial consciousness Attention Attentional control Awareness Binding problem Binocular rivalry Blindsight Brain Cartesian theater Consciousness after death Disorders of consciousness Divided consciousness Dual consciousness (split-brain) Experience Explanatory gap Free will Flash suppression Hallucination Hard problem of consciousness Heterophenomenology Higher consciousness Illusion Introspection illusion Knowledge argument Locked-in syndrome Mind Mind–body problem Minimally conscious state Neural correlates of consciousness Neurophenomenology Ontology Phenomenology Philosophical zombie Philosophy of mind Primary consciousness Problem of other minds Qualia Quantum mind Reentry Sakshi Purusha Secondary consciousness Sentience Sentientism Sociology of human consciousness Soul Stream of consciousness Subconscious Subjective character of experience Subjectivity and objectivity Unconscious mind Unconsciousness Upanishads Visual masking Consciousness causes collapse Yogachara Works A Universe of Consciousness Association for the Scientific Study of Consciousness Consciousness and Cognition Consciousness Explained Cosmic Consciousness How the Self Controls Its Brain Journal of Consciousness Studies Online Consciousness Conference Psyche The Astonishing Hypothesis The Conscious Mind The Emperor's New Mind The Science of Consciousness Understanding Consciousness " What Is It Like to Be a Bat? " Wider than the Sky Category Commons v t e Evolutionary psychology History Evolutionary thought Theoretical foundations Adaptationism Cognitive revolution Cognitivism Gene selection theory Modern synthesis Criticism Evolutionary processes Acquired characteristics Adaptations Altruism Cheating Hamiltonian spite Reciprocal Baldwin effect By-products Evolutionarily stable strategy Exaptation Fitness Inclusive Kin selection Inbreeding avoidance Kin recognition Parental investment Parent–offspring conflict Mismatch Natural selection Sexual selection Costly signaling Male / female intrasexual competition Mate choice Sexual dimorphism Social selection Species-typical behavior Areas Cognition / Emotion Affect Display Display rules Facial expression Behavioral modernity Cognitive module / modularity of mind Adaptive unconscious / Unconscious cognition Automatic and controlled processes Cognitive specialization Computational theory of mind Domain generality Domain specificity / learning Dual process theory Cognitive tradeoff hypothesis Evolution of the brain Evolution of nervous systems Fight-or-flight response Arachnophobia Basophobia Ophidiophobia Folk biology / taxonomy Folk psychology / theory of mind Intelligence Flynn effect Wason selection task Motor control / skill Multitasking Numerical cognition Number sense Approximate number system Parallel individuation system Sleep Visual perception Color vision Eye Naïve physics Culture Aesthetics Literary criticism Musicology Anthropology Biological Crime Language Origin Psychology Speech Morality Moral foundations Religion Origin Social contagion Behavioral contagion Emotional contagion Epidemiology of representations Universals Development Attachment Bonding Biology Affectional / maternal / paternal bond Caregiver deprivation Childhood attachment Cinderella effect Cognitive development Education Neuronal recycling hypothesis Science of reading Language acquisition Personality development Socialization Human factors / mental health Cognitive ergonomics Computer-mediated communication Engineering psychology Human–computer interaction Media naturalness theory Neuroergonomics Depression Digital media use and mental health Hypophobia Imprinted brain hypothesis Mind-blindness Psychological effects of Internet use Rank theory of depression Schizophrenia Screen time Smartphones and pedestrian safety Social aspects of television Societal effects of cars Distracted driving Lead–crime hypothesis Mobile phones and driving safety Texting while driving Sex Activity Adult attachment Age disparity Arousal Concealed ovulation Coolidge effect Desire Fantasy Hormonal motivation Incest taboo Westermarck effect Jealousy Mate guarding Mating preferences Mating strategies Orientation Ovulatory shift hypothesis Pair bond Romantic love Physical / Sexual attraction Sexuality / male / female Sexy son hypothesis Sex differences Aggression Autism Cognition Crime Division of labour Emotional intelligence Empathising–systemising theory Gender role Intelligence Memory Mental health Narcissism Neuroscience Schizophrenia Substance abuse Suicide Variability hypothesis Related subjects 