# Research memo: GitHub - stupside/castor: Point it at any web page and it finds the video, extracts the stream, tran

GitHub - stupside/castor: Point it at any web page and it finds the video, extracts the stream, transcodes it and casts in real time to your TV. It even burns subtitles…. · GitHub Skip to content You signed in with another tab or window. Reload to refresh your session. You signed out in another tab or window. Reload to refresh your session. You switched a stupside / castor Public Notifications You must be signed in to change notification settings Fork 0 Star 114 main Branches Tags Go to file Code Open more actions menu Folders and files Name Name Last commit message Last commit date Latest commit History 61 Commits 61 Commits .github .github cmd cmd internal internal scripts scripts third_party third_party .dockerignore .dockerignore .envrc .envrc .gitignore .gitignore .gitmodules .gitmodules CONTRIBUTING.md CONTRIBUTING.md Dockerfile Dockerfile LICENSE LICENSE Makefile Makefile README.md README.md SECURITY.md SECURITY.md config.yaml config.yaml go.mod go.mod go.sum go.sum main.go main.go View all files Repository files navigation Castor Smart TVs won't cast arbitrary web video, and screen mirroring is laggy and drops resolution. Castor casts the real stream instead, at full quality, from your terminal. I built it because I couldn't cast web video from my laptop to my TV: no Chromecast, no AirPlay. Point it at any web page and Castor finds the video, extracts the stream, transcodes it for your TV, and casts in real time. It also takes a direct stream URL or an IMDB/TMDB id, and can burn in auto-generated subtitles. Run castor cast to browse and search titles, inspect posters and metadata, then cast, without leaving the terminal. Note How extraction works Castor launches headless Chrome with a randomized fingerprint and stealth scripts to hide automation. It watches all network traffic over the Chrome DevTools Protocol to capture the video stream, then runs a short action pipeline: click the page, navigate into the largest iframe, solve a Cloudflare Turnstile if one appears, and click again as a fallback. This works on most streaming sites but won't beat sophisticated bot protection. Installation The recommended way to run Castor is the native binary . It runs directly on your machine, so it shares your TV's network, which device discovery needs. It requires Chrome/Chromium (headless extraction), ffmpeg (transcoding), and ffprobe (format detection) on your PATH . Docker is an optional alternative that bundles all three, but only works from a Linux host. Homebrew (macOS) brew install --cask stupside/tap/castor See Quick start to create the one-time config.yaml (which TV, which sources). After that, casting is a single command, no URL, just an IMDB/TMDB id: castor cast movie tt12300742 From source Needs Go 1.26+ and cmake (the whisper.cpp bindings are cgo and link a locally built libwhisper.a ): git clone --recurse-submodules https://github.com/stupside/cast

(read from: https://github.com/stupside/castor)

---
source: fetch_and_read
