# Research memo: How an influx of salt may affect microbial ecosystems | MIT News | Massachusetts Institute of Techno

How an influx of salt may affect microbial ecosystems | MIT News | Massachusetts Institute of Technology Skip to content ↓ Massachusetts Institute of Technology Search websites, locations, and people See More Results Suggestions or feedback? Enter keywords to search for news articles: Submit Browse By Topics View All → Explore: Machine learning Sustainability Startups Black holes Classes and programs Departments View All → Explore: Aeronautics and Astronautics Brain and Cognitive Sciences Architecture Political Science Mechanical Engineering Centers, Labs, & Programs View All → Explore: Abdul Latif Jameel Poverty Action Lab (J-PAL) Picower Institute for Learning and Memory Media Lab Lincoln Laboratory Schools School of Architecture + Planning School of Engineering School of Humanities, Arts, and Social Sciences Sloan School of Management School of Science MIT Schwarzman College of Computing View all news coverage of MIT in the media → Listen to audio content from MIT News → Subscribe to MIT newsletter → Close Breadcrumb MIT News How an influx of salt may affect microbial ecosystems How an influx of salt may affect microbial ecosystems As sea levels rise and saltwater seeps into freshwater, stressed aquatic populations may retain overall growth even as diversity declines, MIT scientists find. Anne Trafton | MIT News Publication Date : July 17, 2026 Press Inquiries Press Contact : Sarah McDonnell Email: s_mcd@mit.edu Phone: 617-253-8923 Fax: 617-258-8762 MIT News Office Close Caption : Climate-driven sea level rise is making freshwater ecosystems saltier, and MIT researchers have uncovered how that shift could reshape the microbial communities that sustain rivers and estuaries. Credits : Credit: iStock Previous image Next image As sea levels rise due to climate change, encroaching sea water will likely make freshwater environments saltier. In a new study, MIT researchers have shown how that increase in salinity might affect microbial ecosystems found in environments such as rivers and estuaries. These microbial communities play important roles in the carbon cycle, and they also help to decompose organic matter such as algae. The MIT team found that when salt levels rise, these populations lose diversity as faster-growing strains tend to take over the community, but they maintain their overall growth rate. “At higher salinity, you lose diversity, which is ultimately not good for an ecosystem. But what we were surprised at is that in the meantime, even though diversity decreases, the growth of the community and the production of biomass is not impacted that much,” says Jana Huisman, an MIT postdoc and the lead author of the new study. Jeff Gore, an MIT professor of physics, is the senior author of the paper, which appears today in Nature Microbiology . Martina Dal Bello, a former MIT postdoc who is now an assistant professor of ecology and evolutionary biology at Yale University, is also an author of the study. Rising salt levels Microbes that live i

(read from: https://news.mit.edu/2026/how-influx-salt-may-affect-microbial-ecosystems-0717)

---
source: fetch_and_read
