Theistic evolution - Wikipedia Jump to content From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Scientific view of guided evolution by God Part of a series on Evolutionary biology Darwin's finches by John Gould Index Introduction Main Outline Glossary Evidence History Processes and outcomes Population genetics Quantitative genetics Variation Diversity Mutation Natural selection Adaptation Polymorphism Genetic drift Gene flow Speciation Adaptive radiation Cooperation Coevolution Coextinction Contingency Divergence Convergence Parallel evolution Extinction Natural history Origin of life Common descent History of life Timeline of evolution Human evolution Recent human evolution Phylogeny Biodiversity Biogeography Classification Evolutionary taxonomy Cladistics Transitional fossil Extinction event History of evolutionary theory Overview Scientific Revolution Before Darwin Darwin Origin of Species Before synthesis Modern synthesis Molecular evolution Evo-devo Current research History of speciation History of paleontology ( timeline ) Fields and applications Applications of evolution Biosocial criminology Ecological genetics Evolutionary aesthetics Evolutionary anthropology Evolutionary ecology Evolutionary economics Evolutionary epistemology Evolutionary ethics Evolutionary game theory Evolutionary linguistics Evolutionary medicine Evolutionary neuroscience Evolutionary physiology Evolutionary psychology Experimental evolution Invasion genetics Island biogeography Phylogenetics Paleontology Selective breeding Speciation experiments Sociobiology Systematics Universal Darwinism Social implications Eugenics Evolution as fact and theory Dysgenics Social effects Creation–evolution controversy Theistic evolution Objections to evolution Level of support Nature-nurture controversy Evolutionary biology portal Category v t e Part of a series on Creationism History Types Young Earth Geocentric Old Earth day-age gap progressive Neo-creationism Biblical cosmology Book of Genesis creation narrative as an allegory Omphalos hypothesis Creation science Created kind Flood geology Creationist cosmologies Intelligent design Rejection of evolution by religious groups History Public education "Teach the Controversy" Religious views Non-creation Creator in Buddhism Jainism and non-creationism Evolution Theistic evolution Buddhist Christianity Catholic Hindu Islamic Jewish Mormon v t e Theistic evolution (also known as theistic evolutionism or God-guided evolution , or alternatively called evolutionary creationism ) is a view that God acts and creates through laws of nature . Here, God is taken as the primary cause while natural causes are secondary , positing that the concept of God and religious beliefs are compatible with the findings of modern science, including evolution . Theistic evolution is not in itself a scientific theory , but includes a range of views about how science relates to religious beliefs and the extent to which God intervenes. It rejects the strict creationist doctrines of special creation but can include beliefs such as creation of the human soul . Modern theistic evolution accepts the general scientific consensus on the age of the Earth , the age of the universe , the Big Bang , the origin of the Solar System , the origin of life , and evolution. [ 1 ] Supporters of theistic evolution generally attempt to harmonize evolutionary thought with belief in God and reject the conflict between religion and science ; they hold that religious beliefs and scientific theories do not need to contradict each other. [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Diversity exists regarding how the two concepts of faith and science fit together. [ 4 ] Definition [ edit ] Francis Collins describes theistic evolution as the position that "evolution is real, but that it was set in motion by God", [ 5 ] and characterizes it as accepting "that evolution occurred as biologists describe it, but under the direction of God". [ 6 ] He lists six general premises on which different versions of theistic evolution typically rest. They include: [ 7 ] The prevailing cosmological model , with the universe coming into being about 13.8 billion years ago ; The fine-tuned universe ; Evolution and natural selection ; No special supernatural intervention is involved once evolution got under way; Humans are a result of these evolutionary processes; and Despite all these, humans are unique. The concern for the Moral Law (the knowledge of right and wrong) and the continuous search for God among all human cultures defy evolutionary explanations and point to our spiritual nature. The executive director of the National Center for Science Education in the United States of America, Eugenie Scott , has used the term to refer to the part of the overall spectrum of beliefs about creation and evolution holding the theological view that God creates through evolution. It covers a wide range of beliefs about the extent of any intervention by God, with some approaching deism in rejecting the concepts of continued intervention or special creation , while others believe that God has directly intervened at crucial points such as the origin of humans . In the Catholic version of theistic evolution , human evolution may have occurred, but God must create the human soul , [ 1 ] and the creation story in the book of Genesis should be read metaphorically. [ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] Some Muslims believe that only humans were exceptions to common ancestry (human exceptionalism), [ 11 ] while some give an allegorical reading of Adam 's creation (Non-exceptionalism). [ 12 ] [ 13 ] [ 14 ] [ 15 ] Some Muslims believe that only Adam and Hawa (Eve) were special creations and they alongside their earliest descendants were exceptions to common ancestry, but the later descendants (including modern humans) share common ancestry with the rest of life on Earth because there were human-like beings on Earth before Adam's arrival who came through evolution. This belief is known as "Adamic exceptionalism". [ 16 ] When evolutionary science developed, so did different types of theistic evolution. Creationists Henry M. Morris and John D. Morris have listed different terms which were used to describe different positions from the 1890s to the 1920s: " Orthogenesis " (goal-directed evolution), " nomogenesis " (evolution according to fixed law), " emergent evolution " , " creative evolution " , and others. [ 17 ] The Jesuit paleontologist Pierre Teilhard de Chardin (1881–1955) was an influential proponent of God-directed evolution or "orthogenesis", in which man will eventually evolve to the " omega point " of union with the Creator. Alternative terms [ edit ] Others see "evolutionary creation" [ 18 ] (EC, also referred to by some observers as "evolutionary creationism") as the belief that God, as Creator, uses evolution to bring about his plan. Eugenie Scott states in Evolution Vs. Creationism that it is a type of evolution rather than creationism, despite its name. "From a scientific point of view, evolutionary creationism is hardly distinguishable from Theistic Evolution ... [the differences] lie not in science but in theology." [ 19 ] Those who hold to evolutionary creationism argue that God is involved to a greater extent than the theistic evolutionist believes. [ 20 ] Canadian biologist Denis Lamoureux published a 2003 article and a 2008 theological book, both aimed at Christians who do not believe in evolution (including young Earth creationists), and at those looking to reconcile their Christian faith with evolutionary science. His main argument was that Genesis presents the "science and history of the day" as "incidental vessels" to convey spiritual truths. Lamoureux rewrote his article as a 2009 journal paper, incorporating excerpts from his books, in which he noted the similarities of his views to theistic evolution, but objected to that term as making evolution the focus rather than creation. He also distanced his beliefs from the deistic or more liberal beliefs included in theistic evolution. He also argued that although referring to the same view, the word arrangement in the term "theistic evolution" places "the process of evolution as the primary term, and makes the Creator secondary as merely a qualifying adjective". [ 21 ] Divine intervention is seen at critical intervals in history in a way consistent with scientific explanations of speciation , with similarities to the ideas of progressive creationism that God created "kinds" of animals sequentially. [ 1 ] [ 22 ] Regarding the embracing of Darwinian evolution, historian Ronald Numbers describes the position of the late 19th-century geologist George Frederick Wright as "Christian Darwinism". [ 23 ] Jacob Klapwijk [ 24 ] and Howard J. Van Till [ 25 ] have, while accepting both theistic creation and evolution, rejected the term "theistic evolution". In 2006, American geneticist and Director of the National Institute of Health , Francis Collins , published The Language of God . He stated that faith and science are compatible and suggested the word "BioLogos" (Word of Life) to describe theistic evolution. Collins later laid out the idea that God created all things, but that evolution is the best scientific explanation for the diversity of all life on Earth. The name BioLogos instead became the name of the organization Collins founded years later. This organization now prefers the term "evolutionary creation" to describe their take on theistic evolution. [ 26 ] Historical development [ edit ] Further information: Alternatives to evolution by natural selection Historians of science (and authors of pre-evolutionary ideas) have pointed out that scientists had considered the concept of biological change well before Darwin. In the 17th century, the English Nonconformist / Anglican priest and botanist John Ray , in his book The Wisdom of God Manifested in the Works of Creation (1692) , had wondered "why such different species should not only mingle together, but also generate an animal, and yet that that hybridous production should not again generate, and so a new race be carried on". [ 27 ] 18th-century scientist Carl Linnaeus (1707–1778) published Systema Naturae (1735), a book in which he considered that new varieties of plants could arise through hybridization , but only under certain limits fixed by God. Linnaeus had initially embraced the Aristotelian idea of immutability of species (the idea that species never change), but later in his life he started to challenge it. Yet, as a Christian, he still defended "special creation", the belief that God created "every living creature" at the beginning, as read in Genesis, with the peculiarity a set of original species of which all the present species have descended. [ 28 ] Linnaeus wrote: Let us suppose that the Divine Being in the beginning progressed from the simpler to the complex; from few to many; similarly that He in the beginning of the plant kingdom created as many plants as there were natural orders. These plant orders He Himself, there from producing, mixed among themselves until from them originated those plants which today exist as genera. Nature then mixed up these plant genera among themselves through generations -of double origin (hybrids) and multiplied them into existing species, as many as possible (whereby the flower structures were not changed) excluding from the number of species the almost sterile hybrids, which are produced by the same mode of origin. — Systema Vegetabilium (1774) [ 29 ] Linnaeus attributed the active process of biological change to God himself, as he stated: As quoted from Ramsbottom, (1938); in David Briggs (1997), \"Plant Variation and Evolution\" , p. 16 /ref>"}},"i":0}}]}'/> We imagine that the Creator at the actual time of creation made only one single species for each natural order of plants, this species being different in habit and fructification from all the rest. That he made these mutually fertile, whence out of their progeny, fructification having been somewhat changed, Genera of natural classes have arisen as many in number as the different parents, and since this is not carried further, we regard this also as having been done by His Omnipotent hand directly in the beginning; thus all Genera were primeval and constituted a single Species. That as many Genera having arisen as there were individuals in the beginning, these plants in course of time became fertilised by others of different sort and thus arose Species until so many were produced as now exist ... these Species were sometimes fertilised out of congeners, that is other Species of the same Genus, whence have arisen Varieties. — From his Fundamenta fructificationis (1742) [ 30 ] In the 19th century, geology and paleontology were still connected to Old Earth creationism. The above depicts a brutal world of deep time, existing before Adam and Eve, from Thomas Hawkins ' book on plesiosaurs . [ 31 ] Artist: John Martin , 1840 Jens Christian Clausen (1967), refers to Linnaeus' theory as a "forgotten evolutionary theory [that] antedates Darwin's by nearly 100 years", and reports that he was a pioneer in doing experiments about hybridization. [ 32 ] Later observations by Protestant botanists Carl Friedrich von Gärtner (1772–1850) and Joseph Gottlieb Kölreuter (1733–1806) denied the immutability of species, which the Bible never teaches. [ 33 ] Kölreuter used the term " transmutation of species " to refer to species which have experienced biological changes through hybridization, [ 34 ] [ self-published source? ] although they both were inclined to believe that hybrids would revert to the parental forms by a general law of reversion, and therefore, would not be responsible for the introduction of new species. Later, in a number of experiments carried out between 1856 and 1863, the Augustinian friar Gregor Mendel (1822–1884), aligning himself with the "new doctrine of special creation" proposed by Linnaeus, [ 34 ] concluded that new species of plants could indeed arise, although limitedly and retaining their own stability. [ citation needed ] Georges Cuvier 's analysis of fossils and discovery of extinction disrupted static views of nature in the early 19th century, confirming geology as showing a historical sequence of life. British natural theology , which sought examples of adaptation to show design by a benevolent Creator, adopted catastrophism to show earlier organisms being replaced in a series of creations by new organisms better adapted to a changed environment. Charles Lyell (1797–1875) also saw adaptation to changing environments as a sign of a benevolent Creator, but his uniformitarianism envisaged continuing extinctions, leaving unanswered the problem of providing replacements. [ 35 ] As seen in correspondence between Lyell and John Herschel , scientists were looking for creation by laws rather than by miraculous interventions. In continental Europe, the idealism of philosophers including Lorenz Oken (1779–1851) developed a Naturphilosophie in which patterns of development from archetypes were a purposeful divine plan aimed at forming humanity. [ 36 ] These scientists rejected transmutation of species as materialist [ 37 ] [ 38 ] [ 39 ] radicalism threatening the established hierarchies of society. The idealist Louis Agassiz (1807–1873), a persistent opponent of transmutation, saw mankind as the goal of a sequence of creations, but his concepts were the first to be adapted into a scheme of theistic evolutionism, when in Vestiges of the Natural History of Creation published in 1844, its anonymous author ( Robert Chambers ) set out goal-centred progressive development as the Creator's divine plan, programmed to unfold without direct intervention or miracles. The book became a best-seller and popularised the idea of transmutation in a designed "law of progression". The scientific establishment strongly attacked Vestiges at the time, but later more sophisticated theistic evolutionists followed the same approach of looking for patterns of development as evidence of design. [ 40 ] The comparative anatomist Richard Owen (1804–1892), a prominent figure in the Victorian era scientific establishment, opposed transmutation throughout his life. When formulating homology he adapted idealist philosophy to reconcile natural theology with development, unifying nature as divergence from an underlying form in a process demonstrating design. His conclusion to his On the Nature of Limbs of 1849 suggested that divine laws could have controlled the development of life, but he did not expand this idea after objections from his conservative patrons. Others supported the idea of development by law, including the botanist Hewett Watson (1804–1881) and the Reverend Baden Powell (1796–1860), who wrote in 1855 that such laws better illustrated the powers of the Creator. [ 41 ] In 1858 Owen in his speech as President of the British Association said that in "continuous operation of Creative power" through geological time, new species of animals appeared in a "successive and continuous fashion" through birth from their antecedents by a Creative law rather than through slow transmutation. [ 42 ] On the Origin of Species [ edit ] See also: Religious views of Charles Darwin When Charles Darwin published On the Origin of Species in 1859, many liberal Christians accepted evolution provided they could reconcile it with divine design. The clergymen Charles Kingsley (1819–1875) and Frederick Temple (1821–1902), both conservative Christians in the Church of England , promoted a theology of creation as an indirect process controlled by divine laws. Some strict Calvinists welcomed the idea of natural selection , as it did not entail inevitable progress and humanity could be seen as a fallen race requiring salvation . The Anglo-Catholic Aubrey Moore (1848–1890) also accepted the theory of natural selection, incorporating it into his Christian beliefs as merely the way God worked. Darwin's friend Asa Gray (1810–1888) defended natural selection as compatible with design. [ 43 ] Darwin himself, in his second edition of the Origin (January 1860), had written in the conclusion: \nCompare:\n{{cite book\n | last1 = Darwin\n | first1 = Charles\n | author-link1 = Charles Darwin\n | year = 1859\n | title = On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection\n | url = https://books.google.com/books?id=m0g6AQAAMAAJ\n | series = Landmarks of science\n | edition = 5\n | location = New York\n | publisher = D. Appleton and Company\n | publication-date = 1860\n | pages = 431–432\n | access-date = 9 December 2018\n | quote = Page 420, fifteen lines from top, after deceitful guide, [...] omit whole remainder of paragraph, and insert, instead, as follows: Nevertheless, all living things have much in common; in their chemical composition, their germinal vesicles, their cellular structure, and their laws of growth and reproduction. We see this even in so trifling a circumstance as that the same poison often similarly affects plants and animals; or that the poison secreted by the gall-fly produces monstrous growths on the wild rose or oak-tree. [...] Therefore I should infer that probably all organic beings which have ever lived on this earth have descended from some one primordial form, into which life was first breathed by the Creator.\n }}\n /ref>\n"}},"i":0}}]}'/> I believe that animals have descended from at most only four or five progenitors, and plants from an equal or lesser number. Analogy would lead me one step further, namely, to the belief that all animals and plants have descended from some one prototype. But analogy may be a deceitful guide. Nevertheless all living things have much in common, in their chemical composition, their germinal vesicles, their cellular structure, and their laws of growth and reproduction. We see this even in so trifling a circumstance as that the same poison often similarly affects plants and animals; or that the poison secreted by the gall-fly produces monstro