Quantum key distribution - Wikipedia Jump to content From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Secure communication method Quantum key distribution ( QKD ) is a secure communication method that implements a cryptographic protocol based on the laws of quantum mechanics , specifically quantum entanglement, the measurement-disturbance principle, and the no-cloning theorem. [ 1 ] The goal of QKD is to enable two parties to produce a shared random secret key known only to them, which then can be used to encrypt and decrypt messages . This means, when QKD is correctly implemented, one would need to violate fundamental physical principles to break a quantum protocol. The QKD process should not be confused with quantum cryptography in general. An important and unique property of QKD is the ability of the two communicating users to detect the presence of any third party trying to gain knowledge of the key. This results from a fundamental aspect of quantum mechanics: the process of measuring a quantum system in general disturbs the system. This means, a third party attempting to eavesdrop on the key must in some way measure it, thus introducing detectable anomalies, thereby revealing the presence of the eavesdropper. [ 1 ] This unique property ensures that the distributed keys remain secure, as any attempt at interception will be immediately apparent and will invalidate the exchanged key. By using quantum superpositions or quantum entanglement and transmitting information in quantum states , a communication system can be implemented that detects eavesdropping. If the level of eavesdropping is below a certain threshold, a key can be produced that is guaranteed to be secure (i.e., the eavesdropper has no information about it). Otherwise no secure key is possible, and communication is aborted. The security of encryption that uses quantum key distribution relies on the foundations of quantum mechanics, in contrast to traditional public key cryptography , which relies on the computational difficulty of certain mathematical functions , which although conjectured to be strong has not to date been formally proved. [ 2 ] In contrast, QKD has provable security based on information theory , and forward secrecy . The main drawback of quantum-key distribution is that it usually relies on having an authenticated classical channel of communication. [ 1 ] In modern cryptography, having an authenticated classical channel means that one already has exchanged either a symmetric key of sufficient length or public keys of sufficient security level. With such information already available, in practice one can achieve authenticated and sufficiently secure communication without using QKD, such as by using the Galois/Counter Mode of the Advanced Encryption Standard . Thus QKD does the work of a stream cipher at many times the cost. Quantum key distribution is used to produce and distribute only a key, not to transmit any message data. This key can then be used with any chosen encryption algorithm to encrypt (and decrypt) a message, which can then be transmitted over a standard communication channel . The algorithm most commonly associated with QKD is the one-time pad , as it is provably secure when used with a secret, random key. [ 3 ] In real-world situations, it is often also used with encryption using symmetric key algorithms like the Advanced Encryption Standard algorithm. [ 4 ] Quantum key exchange [ edit ] Quantum communication involves encoding information in quantum states, or qubits , as opposed to classical communication's use of bits . Usually, photons are used for these quantum states. Quantum key distribution exploits certain properties of these quantum states to ensure its security. There are several different approaches to quantum key distribution, but they can be divided into two main categories depending on which property they exploit. Prepare-and-measure protocols A prepare-and-measure protocol is a fundamental technique used to establish a secure cryptographic key between two parties, commonly referred to as Alice and Bob. [ 4 ] The parties exploit two communication channels: an insecure quantum channel and an authenticated classical channel. The quantum channel transmits signal states, which an eavesdropper usually has complete control over. As such, Alice prepares quantum states according to her basis and sends them through a quantum channel to Bob, who measures them to retrieve information from the transmitted state which they use to create a shared secret key. Later, Alice and Bob reveal a small sample of their data, and verify that Bob's measurement outcomes are indeed compatible or correlated with those prepared by Alice. If the measurements are compatible, it means the quantum states were undisturbed. However, if the measurements are not compatible, this suggests the presence of an eavesdropper and, depending on the level of error, the parties may abort the protocol. It is important to emphasize that the classical channel is authenticated. This allows Alice and Bob to be sure that they are talking only to each other and are not being impersonated. [ 4 ] As such the eavesdropper can only listen to the communication but cannot modify the messages being sent between Alice and Bob. Examples of prepare-and-measure protocols include the BB84 , B92 and SARG04 protocols. Entanglement-based protocols Entanglement-based schemes leverage the properties of quantum entangled quantum states to securely share cryptographic keys between two parties, Alice and Bob. In an entanglement-based scheme, Alice and Bob share pairs of entangled photons. This means the state of one photon is inherently linked to the state of the other, no matter the distance between them. This is known as entanglement and means that, for example, performing a measurement on one object affects the other. If an entangled pair of objects is shared between two parties, anyone intercepting either object alters the overall system, revealing the presence of the third party (and the amount of information they have gained). This property is important to ensuring security. In this scheme, a source prepares and distributes a maximally entangled quantum state where one system is sent to Alice and another to Bob. Alice measures her half of the entangled pair, randomly choosing between different measurement bases. Bob then measures his half using the same or different bases. On measurement, Alice and Bob obtain perfectly correlated outcomes which are completelly random. The results of their measurements, when compared, can be used to establish a shared secret key. Examples of entanglement-based protocols include the E91, [ 5 ] BBM92 protocols. The quantum states of two (or more) separate objects can become linked together in such a way that they must be described by a combined quantum state, not as individual objects. These two approaches can each be further divided into three families of protocols: discrete variable, continuous variable and distributed phase reference coding. Discrete variable protocols were the first to be invented, and they remain the most widely implemented. The other two families are mainly concerned with overcoming practical limitations of experiments. The two protocols described below both use discrete variable coding. BB84 protocol: Charles H. Bennett and Gilles Brassard (1984) [ edit ] Main article: BB84 This protocol, known as BB84 after its inventors and year of publication, was originally described using photon polarization states to transmit the information. [ 6 ] However, any two pairs of conjugate states can be used for the protocol, and many optical-fibre -based implementations described as BB84 use phase encoded states. The sender (traditionally referred to as Alice ) and the receiver (Bob) are connected by a quantum communication channel which allows quantum states to be transmitted. In the case of photons this channel is generally either an optical fibre or simply free space . In addition they communicate via a public classical channel, for example using broadcast radio or the internet. The protocol is designed with the assumption that an eavesdropper (referred to as Eve) can interfere in any way with the quantum channel, while the classical channel needs to be authenticated . [ 7 ] [ 8 ] The security of the protocol comes from encoding the information in non-orthogonal states . Quantum indeterminacy means that these states cannot in general be measured without disturbing the original state (see No-cloning theorem ). BB84 uses two pairs of states, with each pair conjugate to the other pair, and the two states within a pair orthogonal to each other. Pairs of orthogonal states are referred to as a basis . The usual polarization state pairs used are either the rectilinear basis of vertical (0°) and horizontal (90°), the diagonal basis of 45° and 135° or the circular basis of left- and right-handedness. Any two of these bases are conjugate to each other, and so any two can be used in the protocol. Below the rectilinear and diagonal bases are used. Basis 0 1 The first step in BB84 is quantum transmission. Alice creates a random bit (0 or 1) and then randomly selects one of her two bases (rectilinear or diagonal in this case) to transmit it in. She then prepares a photon polarization state depending both on the bit value and basis, as shown in the adjacent table. So for example a 0 is encoded in the rectilinear basis (+) as a vertical polarization state, and a 1 is encoded in the diagonal basis (x) as a 135° state. Alice then transmits a single photon in the state specified to Bob, using the quantum channel. This process is then repeated from the random bit stage, with Alice recording the state, basis and time of each photon sent. According to quantum mechanics (particularly quantum indeterminacy), no possible measurement distinguishes between the 4 different polarization states, as they are not all orthogonal. The only possible measurement is between any two orthogonal states (an orthonormal basis). So, for example, measuring in the rectilinear basis gives a result of horizontal or vertical. If the photon was created as horizontal or vertical (as a rectilinear eigenstate ) then this measures the correct state, but if it was created as 45° or 135° (diagonal eigenstates) then the rectilinear measurement instead returns either horizontal or vertical at random. Furthermore, after this measurement the photon is polarized in the state it was measured in (horizontal or vertical), with all information about its initial polarization lost. As Bob does not know the basis the photons were encoded in, all he can do is to select a basis at random to measure in, either rectilinear or diagonal. He does this for each photon he receives, recording the time, measurement basis used and measurement result. After Bob has measured all the photons, he communicates with Alice over the public classical channel. Alice broadcasts the basis each photon was sent in, and Bob the basis each was measured in. They both discard photon measurements (bits) where Bob used a different basis, which is half on average, leaving half the bits as a shared key. Alice's random bit 0 1 1 0 1 0 0 1 Alice's random sending basis Photon polarization Alice sends Bob's random measuring basis Photon polarization Bob measures PUBLIC DISCUSSION OF BASIS Shared secret key 0 1 0 1 To check for the presence of an eavesdropper, Alice and Bob now compare a predetermined subset of their remaining bit strings. If a third party (usually referred to as Eve, for "eavesdropper") has gained any information about the photons' polarization, this introduces errors in Bob's measurements. Other environmental conditions can cause errors in a similar fashion. If more than p {\displaystyle p} bits differ they abort the key and try again, possibly with a different quantum channel, as the security of the key cannot be guaranteed. p {\displaystyle p} is chosen so that if the number of bits known to Eve is less than this, privacy amplification can be used to reduce Eve's knowledge of the key to an arbitrarily small amount at the cost of reducing the length of the key. Finite-key analyses account for statistical fluctuations when only a finite number of quantum signals are exchanged. Hayashi gave a finite-length security evaluation framework for quantum key distribution, [ 9 ] and Hayashi and Tsurumaru later derived a tight finite-key security analysis for the BB84 protocol. [ 10 ] Koashi and Preskill also gave a BB84 security proof with an uncharacterized source, assuming in particular that the emitted states do not reveal the basis choice. [ 11 ] E91 protocol: Artur Ekert (1991) [ edit ] Artur Ekert 's scheme [ 12 ] uses entangled pairs of photons. These can be created by Alice, by Bob, or by some source separate from both of them, including eavesdropper Eve. The photons are distributed so that Alice and Bob each end up with one photon from each pair. The scheme relies on two properties of entanglement. First, the entangled states are perfectly correlated in the sense that if Alice and Bob both measure whether their particles have vertical or horizontal polarizations, they always get opposite answers with 100% probability. The same is true if they both measure any other pair of complementary (orthogonal) polarizations. This necessitates that the two distant parties have exact directionality synchronization. However, the particular results are completely random; it is impossible for Alice to predict if she (and thus Bob) will get vertical polarization or horizontal polarization. Second, any attempt at eavesdropping by Eve destroys these correlations in a way that Alice and Bob can detect. Similarly to BB84 , the protocol involves a private measurement protocol before detecting the presence of Eve. The measurement stage involves Alice measuring each photon she receives using some basis from the set Z 0 , Z π 8 , Z π 4 {\displaystyle Z_{0},Z_{\frac {\pi }{8}},Z_{\frac {\pi }{4}}} while Bob chooses from Z 0 , Z π 8 , Z − π 8 {\displaystyle Z_{0},Z_{\frac {\pi }{8}},Z_{-{\frac {\pi }{8}}}} where Z θ {\displaystyle Z_{\theta }} is the { | ↑ ⟩ , | → ⟩ } {\displaystyle \{|{\uparrow }\rangle ,\;|{\rightarrow }\rangle \}} basis rotated by θ {\displaystyle \theta } . They keep their series of basis choices private until measurements are completed. Two groups of photons are made: the first consists of photons measured using the same basis by Alice and Bob while the second contains all other photons. To detect eavesdropping, they can compute the test statistic S {\displaystyle S} using the correlation coefficients between Alice's bases and Bob's similar to that shown in the Bell test experiments . Maximally entangled photons would result in | S | = 2 2 {\displaystyle |S|=2{\sqrt {2}}} . If this were not the case, then Alice and Bob can conclude Eve has introduced local realism to the system, violating Bell's theorem . If the protocol is successful, the first group can be used to generate keys since those photons are completely anti-aligned between Alice and Bob. Device-Independent quantum key distribution [ edit ] One of the most significant vulnerabilities in a cryptosystem, whether quantum or classical, arises from a discrepancy between its theoretical design and its actual implementation. [ 13 ] If a cryptosystem is implemented correctly and the hardware performs as expected, everything functions smoothly. However, real systems are imprecise. In traditional QKD, the quantum devices used must be perfectly calibrated, trustworthy, and working exactly as they are expected to. [ 14 ] Deviations from expected measurements can be extremely hard to detect, which leaves the entire system vulnerable. A new protocol called device independent QKD (DIQKD) or measurement device independent QKD (MDIQKD) allows for the use of uncharacterized or untrusted devices, and for deviations from expected measurements to be included in the overall system. [ 14 ] [ 15 ] These deviations will cause the protocol to abort when detected, rather than resulting in incorrect data. [ 14 ] Specifically, the security of a protocol is not dependent on a correct model or implementation. Due to its robust security guarantees, DI protocols like DI-QKD are considered the gold standard in cryptography, as no attacks can exploit discrepancies between theoretical models and the implementation of quantum hardware. [ 16 ] The most significant aspect of DI-QKD protocols lies in their capacity to verify the unpredictability of outcomes generated by various devices, such as those employed for cryptographic key generation, quantum computations, or the characterization of quantum properties including entanglement. [ 17 ] Thus, DI-QKD protocols extend their utility beyond the realm of cryptography, serving as a formidable technique for hardware characterization. This is particularly pertinent in the evaluation of components and functionalities in quantum communication systems, especially with regard to fidelity metrics. Despite notable advancements in the field, DI-QKD protocols continue to depend on a limited set of minimal assumptions. These include the capability for clock synchronization and the expectation that classical hardware will perform as specified. [ 18 ] Currently, while the potential for DI-QKD is substantial, challenges remain related to the reliable distribution of entanglement and the necessity for enhanced performance across systems. Therefore, considerable research effort is still required to advance DI-QKD schemes to their full potential. DIQKD was first proposed by Mayers and Yao, [ 19 ] building off of the BB84 protocol. They presented that in DIQKD, the quantum device, which they refer to as the photon source, be manufactured to come with tests that can be run by Alice and Bob to "self-check" if their device is working properly. Such a test would only need to consider the classical inputs and outputs in order to determine how much information is at risk of being intercepted by Eve. A self checking, or "ideal" source would not have to be characterized, [ 15 ] [ 20 ] and would therefore not be susceptible to implementation flaws. [ 15 ] Recent research has proposed using a Bell test to check that a device is working properly. [ 14 ] Bell's theorem ensures that a device can create two outcomes that are exclusively correlated, meaning that Eve could not intercept the results, without making any assumptions about said device. This requires highly entangled states, and a low quantum bit error rate. [ 15 ] DIQKD presents difficulties in creating qubits that are in such high quality entangled states, which makes it a challenge to realize experimentally. [ 14 ] In 2026, researchers reported an experimental demonstration of long-distance entanglement -based quantum communication over optical fibre exceeding 100 km using single atoms, as reported by news outlets. [ 21 ] While such experiments do not yet meet all the requirements for fully DIQKD, they illustrate ongoing progress toward practical implementations of device-independent quantum communication. [ 22 ] Twin-Field quantum key distribution [ edit ] The Twin-Field quantum key distribution (TF-QKD) was introduced in 2018, and is a version of DIQKD designed to improve the security and overcome the fundamental rate-distance limit of traditional QKD protocols. [ 23 ] The rate-distance limit, also known as the rate-loss trade off, describes how as distance increases between Alice and Bob, the rate of key generation decreases exponentially. [ 24 ] In traditional QKD protocols, this decay has been eliminated via the addition of physically secured relay nodes, which can be placed along the quantum link with the intention of dividing it up into several low-loss sections. Researchers have also recommended the use of quantum repeaters, which when added to the relay nodes make it so that they no longer need to be physically secured. 