The Problems of Philosophy - Wikipedia Jump to content From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Book by Bertrand Russell This article is about the book. For the concept, see unsolved problems in philosophy . For the Russian magazine, see Problems of philosophy (magazine) . The Problems of Philosophy Title page of the first edition Author Bertrand Russell Language English Subject Philosophy Publication date 1912 Publication place United Kingdom Media type Print The Problems of Philosophy is a 1912 book by the philosopher Bertrand Russell , [ 1 ] in which the author attempts to create a brief and accessible guide to the problems of philosophy. He introduces philosophy as a repeating series of (failed) attempts to answer the same questions: Can we prove that there is an external world? Can we prove cause and effect? Can we validate any of our generalizations? Can we objectively justify morality? He asserts that philosophy cannot answer any of these questions and that any value of philosophy must lie elsewhere than in offering proofs to these questions. Focusing on problems he believes will provoke positive and constructive discussion, Russell concentrates on knowledge rather than metaphysics : If it is uncertain that external objects exist, how can we then have knowledge of them but by probability. There is no reason to doubt the existence of external objects simply because of sense data. The book also looks at the question of mathematical truths and philosophy within mathematics, particularly the question of how pure mathematics is possible. [ 2 ] Russell guides the reader through his famous 1910 distinction between knowledge by acquaintance and knowledge by description [ 3 ] and introduces important theories of Plato , Aristotle , René Descartes , David Hume , John Locke , Immanuel Kant , Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel and others to lay the foundation for philosophical inquiry by general readers and scholars alike. In the following pages I have confined myself in the main to those problems of philosophy in regard to which I thought it possible to say something positive and constructive, since merely negative criticism seemed out of place. For this reason, theory of knowledge occupies a larger space than metaphysics in the present volume, and some topics much discussed by philosophers are treated very briefly, if at all. — Bertrand Russell, Preface of The Problems of Philosophy Russell called the book his 'shilling shocker' and saw it as a short, cheap book, written for a general audience; [ 4 ] it has been his most read book for decades. It has often been set as a textbook for philosophy students. [ 5 ] However reception of the book among philosophers has not always been positive, for instance, Geoffrey Warnock characterised the book's treatment of perception as having made an "appalling hash" of the topic. [ 6 ] References [ edit ] ↑ Oxford University Press website, The Problems of Philosophy ↑ University College Oxford website, The Problems of Philosophy ↑ PillPapers website, The Problems of Philosophy ↑ Taylor and Francis website, Bertrand Russell: The Problems of Philosophy ↑ Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy website, Bertrand Russell ↑ Warnock, Geoffrey (1979). "Philosophical Problems by Leonard Goddard" . The Philosophical Quarterly . 29 (114): 83–4. External links [ edit ] English Wikisource has original text related to this article: The Problems of Philosophy Wikiquote has quotations related to The Problems of Philosophy . The Problems of Philosophy at Standard Ebooks The Problems of Philosophy at Project Gutenberg The Problems of Philosophy public domain audiobook at LibriVox v t e Bertrand Russell British philosopher, logician, and social critic Philosophy Philosophical views Copleston–Russell debate Logical atomism Russell's teapot Theory of descriptions Political views Russell–Einstein Manifesto Russell Tribunal Mathematics Peano–Russell notation Russell's paradox Works The Principles of Mathematics (1903) " On Denoting " (1905) Principia Mathematica (1910–1913) The Problems of Philosophy (1912) Why Men Fight (1916) Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy (1919) " Free Thought and Official Propaganda " (1922) " Why I Am Not a Christian " (1927) Marriage and Morals (1929) In Praise of Idleness and Other Essays (1935) Power: A New Social Analysis (1938) A History of Western Philosophy (1945) My Philosophical Development (1959) Family Alys Pearsall Smith (wife, 1894–1921) Dora Russell (wife, 1921–1935) Patricia Russell (wife, 1936–1951) Edith Finch Russell (wife, 1952–1970) John Russell, 4th Earl Russell (son) Conrad Russell, 5th Earl Russell (son) Frank Russell, 2nd Earl Russell (brother) John Russell, Viscount Amberley (father) Katharine Russell, Viscountess Amberley (mother) John Stuart Mill (godfather) John Russell, 1st Earl Russell (paternal grandfather) Henrietta Stanley, Baroness Stanley of Alderley (maternal grandmother) Related Appointment court case Earl Russell Peace Foundation Professorship of Philosophy Category: Works by Bertrand Russell Authority control databases Open Library Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=The_Problems_of_Philosophy oldid=1362155450 " Categories : 1912 non-fiction books Books by Bertrand Russell 1912 English-language non-fiction books English non-fiction books Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2022 Articles with Project Gutenberg links Articles with LibriVox links Search Search The Problems of Philosophy 15 languages Add topic