List of stock characters - Wikipedia Jump to content From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article currently links to a large number of disambiguation pages (or back to itself) . Please help direct these ambiguous links to articles dealing with the specific content intended. Read the FAQ . ( September 2026 ) This is a dynamic list and may never be able to satisfy particular standards for completeness. You can help by editing the page to add missing items, with references to reliable sources . Claude Gillot (1673–1722) — Four Commedia dell'arte Figures: Three Gentlemen and Pierrot , c. 1715 Stock characters from Italian : Commedia dell'Arte — which gave each character a standard costume, so easily distinguished – continued across many types of theater, dramatic storytelling, and fiction A stock character is a dramatic or literary character representing a generic type in a conventional, simplified manner and recurring in many fictional works. [ 1 ] The following list labels some of these stereotypes and provides examples. Some character archetypes , the more universal foundations of fictional characters, are also listed. Some characters that were first introduced as fully fleshed-out characters become subsequently used as stock characters in other works – for example, the Ebenezer Scrooge character from A Christmas Carol , upon whom the "miser" stereotype is based, and whose name now has become a shorthand for it. Some stock characters incorporate more than one stock character; for example, a bard may also be a wisecracking jester . Some of the stock characters in this list – reflecting the respective attitudes of the people of the time and the place in which they have been created – in hindsight, may be considered offensive due to their use of racial stereotyping , homophobia , or other prejudice. Contents A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W Y Z See also References A [ edit ] Character type Description Examples Absent-minded professor / Boffin An eccentric scientific genius stereotype who is so focused on their work that they have shortfalls in other areas of life, ( remembering things , grooming , etc.). [ 2 ] The shortened term for this character is a "boffin." It is the benign version of the mad scientist stereotype. Prof. Calculus in The Adventures of Tintin series by Hergé Sidney Stratton, played by Alec Guinness , in the 1951 satirical film The Man in the White Suit Prof. Julius F. Kelp , played by Jerry Lewis , in the 1963 film The Nutty Professor Dr. Egon Spengler , played by Harold Ramis , in the Ghostbusters film series Dr. Emmett Brown , played by Christopher Lloyd , in the Back to the Future film series [ 3 ] Prof. Frink in the animated American television sitcom series The Simpsons , drawn on Prof. Kelp Prof. Farnsworth in the animated American television sitcom series Futurama , drawn as an elderly Prof. Frink Action hero The brave and heroic protagonist of a story which portrays action, adventure, and often violence. [ 4 ] They are resourceful, courageous, and have strong commitment to their cause, and they are comfortable with the fast pace of events in the story. Often overlaps with " chosen one " or superhero . They are often a competent man who is able to pilot any vessel or vehicle and use any weapon. See: Action heroes . Adolescent /juvenile action hero This plucky, curious child or youth uncovers a villain's plans or finds characters in need of assistance though their investigations as a journalist , amateur sleuth or secret agent . They may have similar wide-ranging skills to the competent man . In other instances they may be well-intentioned but gullible, or bratty and irritating. Tintin , a teenage journalist and detective The Stranger Things gang The Famous Five The Hardy Boys Johnny Quest Spy Kids James Bond Jr. Spongebob Dink the Little Dinosaur Jake Lloyd as Anakin Skywalker Scrappy-Doo Agricultural labourer / shepherd / cowboy In Western films the farmer or rancher employs a team of hands to round up livestock , harvest the crops and protect the homestead from bandits . The group usually includes a young rookie or greenhorn, an experienced old-timer and a cook who is usually a black American . Owen Lars in Attack of the Clones Wal Footrot in Footrot Flats Mr. Hoggett in Babe Boggis, Bunce and Bean in Fantastic Mr. Fox Alan Ladd as Shane Henry Fonda in The Grapes of Wrath Peter Fogg in Postman Pat Gabriel Oak in Far from the Madding Crowd Bitzer the sheepdog in Shaun the Sheep John Wayne in The Cowboys Gene Autry in Back in the Saddle Earl Reagan in Flesh Albino The albino has pale skin and long white hair and may be a magician or assassin. Is usually evil or an antihero . Albinism organisations and others have expressed criticism over the portrayal of individuals with albinism in popular culture, specifically in movies and fictional works, citing the overwhelmingly negative depiction. There is concern that such depictions could increase social bias and discrimination against individuals with albinism. [ 5 ] This phenomenon is often referred to as the " evil albino " plot device. Elric of Melniboné Oswald in The Deptford Mice Kotick the seal in The Jungle Book Daenerys Targaryen in Game of Thrones Otis B. Driftwood in The Devil's Rejects Bad Bob (played by Stacy Keach ) in The Life and Times of Judge Roy Bean Silas in The Da Vinci Code Azog in The Hobbit Moby Dick the white whale Alien A visitor to Earth from another planet. May be a friendly little green man or a monstrous eldritch abomination with tentacles or an aggressive Xenomorph . Often pilots a flying saucer and possesses advanced technology. E.T. Pia Zadora as Girmar in Santa Claus Conquers the Martians Chewbacca , Han Solo 's Wookiee companion The Purple People Eater Superman from DC Comics Alf from the Alf (TV series) The Sontarans in Doctor Who The Martians in War of the Worlds The Xenomorphs in Aliens Amazon / Shield maiden / Valkyrie A female barbarian warrior from classical mythology and Norse mythology skilled at archery and equestrianism . Usually wears a short leather skirt or chain mail bikini , sword belt, sandals, sculpted bronze breastplate, and fur cloak . See also tomboy , cave girl and bad girl . Hippolyta in the Twelve Labours of Hercules Penthesilia in The Iliad Eowyn in The Two Towers Helga, wife of Hagar the Horrible Abba in Asterix and the Vikings Brunnhilde in the Nibelungenlied Brida in The Last Kingdom Dyala in Amazons Dee Booher in Deathstalker 2 Xena: Warrior Princess Valeria in Conan the Barbarian Angels and demons In fantasy, archangels are beautiful and ethereal beings with long blonde hair. Winged cherubs are small and childlike and carry a bow and arrow like Cupid from Greek mythology . Demons and nephilim are fallen angels and often have hooves, horns and tails like satyrs . Cupid in Disney's Fantasia Eric Draven in The Crow Charlie in All Dogs Go to Heaven Gabriel in Constantine The Escort in Heaven Can Wait Dolly Parton in Unlikely Angel The fallen angels in Noah Satan in Wreck-It Ralph Pazuzu in The Exorcist Little Nicky The Cenobites in Hellraiser Lucifer in Preacher The demons in Red Hot Mamma Angry black woman A negatively stereotypical assertive, overbearing, opinionated, loud, and "sassy" American black woman – typically of the working class – with an acid tongue, often depicted as nagging and emasculating a male character. [ 6 ] [ 7 ] This stereotype is a more modern variant of the archetypes of the old shrew and the foul-mouthed and sharp-tongued fishwife character, exemplified by Molly Malone . Mammy Two Shoes in the Tom and Jerry series of short animated films from the 1940s Sapphire in the 1950s→1960s American radio and television series Amos 'n' Andy [ 8 ] Aunt Esther in the 1970s American television sitcom series Sanford and Son Florence Johnston in the 1970s→1980s American television sitcom series The Jeffersons Wilhelmina Slater in the 2000s American television series Ugly Betty [ 9 ] Mary Lee Johnston from the 2009 film Precious Angry white man A working class hidebound reactionary , white man whose frustration with progressive policies and social changes leading towards a more tolerant society – in which he has a lesser role and powerless to change this demotion – that leaves him at odds with accepted norms, so escalating into rage and on to violence, in extreme cases. In dramatic fiction, this usually leads to the character's downfall . In a running series, the angry white man may soften and become accepting with time to be more sympathetic – see also curmudgeon . Alf Garnett , played by Warren Mitchell in a career-defining role from the 1960s to the 1980s, in the BBC television sitcom series Till Death Us Do Part and the follow-on series Till Death... and In Sickness and in Health ; and his American counterpart Archie Bunker in the 1970s American television sitcom series All in the Family William 'D-Fens' Foster in the 1993 film Falling Down Howard Beale in the 1976 film Network Ernest's grandad in East Is East Combo and the skinheads in This Is England Angry young man / Yobbo A violent young antihero in British stories set during the 1960s, 1970s or 1980s who is frustrated by the monotony of his dead end job and the boredom of living in his grimy working class council estate . He finds purpose by joining a street gang and descends into petty crime, drinking, drug addiction and violence against other gangs that culminates in prison or the mortuary. Depending on the era, he may be a mod , teddy boy , rocker , street punk , or football hooligan / chav . A stock character in kitchen sink drama . Jimmy in Quadrophenia Rico and Cain in Sumotherhood John Boyega in Attack the Block Pete and the Green Street Hooligans John and the Neds Ray Winstone in Scum Johnny Rotten and Sid Vicious in The Great Rock 'n' Roll Swindle Alex DeLarge and the Droogs in A Clockwork Orange Roy in Cosh Boy Christopher Eccleston in Let Him Have It Animal trainer / jockey A person who trains animals to carry out useful tasks or perform tricks. May be a cop with a sniffer dog , circus performer, mahout with Indian elephant , racehorse jockey or zookeeper . Officer Ruiz in A Dog's Purpose Tiny the dog trainer in Stage Fright Viggo Mortensen in Hidalgo Tobey Maguire in Seabiscuit The jockeys in Saddlesore Galactica are a race of monstrous trolls who live underground in a fiberglass tree. Albert in War Horse Sabu as Toomai of the Elephants in Elephant Boy Annoying neighbor A comic character known for being nosy and for pestering and hounding the protagonist. As they live next door to them, this creates a pretext for frequent unwanted or unplanned interactions. Tini in the mid-20th century radio comedy series Fibber McGee and Molly Newman in the 1990s American television sitcom series Seinfeld Ned Flanders in animated American television sitcom series The Simpsons Kimmy Gibler in the 1980s→90s American television sitcom series Full House Jolyon Wagg in The Adventures of Tintin Wally Walrus and Buzz Buzzard in Woody Woodpecker Agnes Peenman is a hounding landlady to Stanley Ipkiss in The Mask SpongeBob SquarePants is the annoying neighbor to Squidward Tentacles Antihero A protagonist lacking conventional heroic qualities, such as courage or idealism . [ 10 ] An antihero has weaknesses and may engage in criminal acts at times, but lacks any sinister intentions and is usually, if begrudgingly and unconventionally, ethical. James "Slippery Jim" Bolivar diGriz in The Stainless Steel Rat book series, starting in the 1950s, by Harry Harrison The Man with No Name , played by Clint Eastwood , as the protagonist in the 1960s spaghetti Western Dollars Trilogy by Sergio Leone [ 11 ] Harry Flashman in the satirical The Flashman Papers book series by George MacDonald Fraser Eddie Valiant in the 1981 book Who censored Roger Rabbit? by Gary K. Wolf Deadpool in the Marvel Comics [ 12 ] Harley Quinn in the DC Comics Antivillain The opposite to the anti-hero, they are a well-intentioned or misunderstood antagonist who has character traits more commonly associated with a stock hero. He will uphold the law, save lives and try to capture the antihero protagonist. In a crime film he is often a police inspector in pursuit of a gentleman thief , con artist or fugitive wrongly accused of murder. The antivillain is often a noble adversary . Javert in Les Miserables Thomson and Thompson in The Crab with the Golden Claws Boris Karloff as Frankenstein's Monster Eric Finch in V for Vendetta Jajuka in Escaflowne Dean Wormer in Animal House Vaako in The Chronicles of Riddick Roland Tembo in The Lost World: Jurassic Park Howard in Short Circuit The sheriff in Westworld Major Willoughby in Up in the World Officer Dibble in Top Cat Ape Apes often appear as sidekicks in family comedy movies. Chimpanzees and orangutans are usually mischievous, gorillas are strong but protective, cryptids like Bigfoot or the yeti are misunderstood, and primitive humans are brutal and evil (see caveman ). Chim-Chim in Speed Racer Muffit II, Boxey's pet daggit in Battlestar Galactica is part robot, part dog and part monkey Clyde the orangutan in Every Which Way But Loose and Cannonball Run King Kong Rocko the gorilla doctor in Noah's Island Dr Zaius in Planet of the Apes Mighty Joe Young Harry and the Hendersons Mr Link in Missing Link Ronald Reagan in Bedtime for Bonzo The savage ape men in The Lost World by Arthur Conan Doyle Apprentice A younger person who is learning a profession or trade by working under the guidance of an experienced, older mentor. In the crafts and trades, the younger person may be called an apprentice, but in other fields, they may be called a protégé , intern , trainee, or rookie . In addition to learning technical skills, the mentor teaches the values and culture of the guild or profession. Apprentice characters range from hardworking, serious rookies who nonetheless make errors due to lack of experience, to problematic apprentices who may be careless, lazy, or mischievous. The apprentice's coming of age journey, as they transition to adulthood is known as a Bildungsroman . In fantasy, the wise mentor may be a wizard or witch . In historical stories, the mentor may be a Master craftsman in a guild , and a knight 's trainee is a squire . In the Star Wars stories, a young Jedi, Obi-Wan Kenobi , trains a headstrong and rebellious Jedi padawan named Anakin Skywalker ; at the end of his life, Kenobi trains an apprentice named Luke Skywalker . In "The Sorcerer's Apprentice" in Disney 's Fantasia (1940), Mickey Mouse is an apprentice who tries to make his assigned chores easier by using forbidden spells. In Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon , Jen Yu trains as a warrior under Jade Fox. In Tom Tykwer 's film Perfume: The Story of a Murderer , Jean-Baptiste Grenouille ( Ben Whishaw ) learns how to capture scents from master perfumist Giuseppe Baldini ( Dustin Hoffman ). In Luc Besson 's film Léon: The Professional , experienced hitman Léon ( Jean Reno ) teaches his illegal craft to an unusual apprentice: a 12-year-old orphan named Mathilda ( Natalie Portman ). In Terry Pratchett 's Discworld series, Mort apprentices with Death , a Grim Reaper-type character . Arab and Muslim stereotypes Arab and Muslim characters in Hollywood films are often portrayed in an ethno-centric or stereotyped way. [ 13 ] These characters often were depicted as all generic relatively faceless and interchangeable, speaking in a heavy accent, being hostile and vicious, along with being connected to terrorism . [ 14 ] As well, American films and television shows may have stereotypical and pejorative depictions of Arabs and Muslims . The American-Arab Anti-Discrimination Committee states that "Arabs in TV and movies are portrayed as either bombers , belly dancers , or [oil] billionaires". [ 15 ] [ 16 ] [ 17 ] Pejorative stereotypes of Arabs or Muslims as villains are common in late 20th century Hollywood action films including: Iron Eagle (1986) The Delta Force (1986) Death Before Dishonor (1987) Wanted: Dead or Alive (1987) Navy SEALs (1990) Patriot Games (1992) True Lies (1994) Executive Decision (1996) Achmed, the Dead Terrorist satirical puppet of the ventriloquist Jeffrey Dunham Archaeologist / Palaeontologist / treasure hunter An adventurer who travels the world digging up dinosaur fossils and lost civilisations. Often has a day job as a university professor . Indiana Jones in Raiders of the Lost Ark Alan Grant in Jurassic Park Dan Garrett, the Blue Beetle Rachel Weisz in The Mummy Returns Lara Croft in Tomb Raider Sophocles Sarcophagus in Cigars of the Pharaoh Dirk Pitt in Sahara Nicholas Cage in National Treasure Phil Harding in Time Team Archenemy / Nemesis A supervillain with a personal vendetta against the hero. They may have once been friends or fellow students of a shared wise old man mentor before the villain turned to evil. See: Villain Professor Moriarty to Sherlock Holmes Ernst Stavro Blofeld to James Bond Darth Vader to Ben Kenobi Lord Shin to Kenshiro Erik Leinsherr to Charles Xavier Doctor Doom to Reed Richards The Joker to Batman Arms dealer / gunsmith A wealthy man who made his fortune from war profiteering and manufacturing and selling weapons. May be CEO of a large company, owner of a small town gun shop with "under the counter" Saturday night special guns for sale, part of the criminal underworld with a secret ghost gun workshop in the council estate, or a seemingly legitimate Old West trader illicitly running guns to the Indians or Latin American rebels. He is usually an amoral villain who sells arms to both sides in the conflict, but sometimes he is a patriot supporting the one side's war effort. Hugh Laurie in The Night Manager Daddy Warbucks in the 1940s editions of Little Orphan Annie Audie Murphy in The Gun Runners Obadiah Stane in Iron Man Basil Bazaroff in Tintin and the Broken Ear Donald Pleasence as Isaac Q. Cumber in Soldier Blue Gunsmith Bitch in Panty Stocking with Garterbelt Nicolas Cage in Lord of War Zorg in The Fifth Element Artificial intelligence (AI) In science fiction stories, artificial intelligence (AI) are depicted as computational systems that are sophisticated enough to perform tasks typically associated with human intelligence , such as learning, reasoning, problem-solving, perception, and decision-making. In contrast to mechanical robotic beings in fiction – some of which are depicted as having sophisticated AI capabilities – usually AI does not have a metal or humanoid body and they are instead depicted as residing in some type of computer system or network. AIs are depicted with varying degrees of ability to cause actions in the real world, ranging from communicating via text or speech synthesis to triggering digitally-connected devices . AIs may be depicted in a variety of ways, ranging from benevolent to neutral to hostile. HAL 9000 , the sentient artificial general intelligence computer that controls the systems of the Discovery One spacecraft and interacts with the ship's astronaut crew in Stanley Kubrick 's 2001: A Space Odyssey film of 1968. Skynet is a fictional group mind and artificial general superintelligence system that serves as the antagonistic force of the Terminator franchise . Wintermute is one half of a super-AI entity in the 1984 dystopian cyberpunk novel Neuromancer by William Gibson KITT in Knight Rider The city computer in Logan's Run President Eden in Fallout 3 Agent Smith in The Matrix Mother Brain in Phantasy Star II Omnius and Erasmus in Sandworms of Dune Astronaut The science fiction counterpart to the explorer, flying ace and sea captain . They are courageous, charismatic, irresistible to women, skilled in both unarmed combat and the use of a ray gun , and resourceful in the face of emergencies. Often commands a crew that includes a scientist, a robot and a female love interest. In smaller spaceships or when in space, they wear a pressure suit , air supply and helmet. In large spaceship