# Research memo: Sea Monkeys Show Scientists How To Rewrite a Rule of Turbulence | Quanta Magazine

Sea Monkeys Show Scientists How To Rewrite a Rule of Turbulence | Quanta Magazine Home Sea Monkeys Show Scientists How To Rewrite a Rule of Turbulence Comment Save Article Read Later Share Facebook Copied! Copy link Email Pocket Reddit Ycombinator Comment Comments Save Article Read Later Read Later fluid dynamics Sea Monkeys Show Scientists How To Rewrite a Rule of Turbulence By Stephen Ornes October 2, 2026 Scientists assumed that energy flows in only one direction in a turbulent system. What they didn’t know, until they looked closely at brine shrimp, was that a simple factor can reverse the flow. Comment Save Article Read Later In Lei Fang’s lab at the University of Pittsburgh, a brine shrimp swims through a two-dimensional turbulent system. Xinyu Si/University of Pittsburgh Introduction In the 1960s and ’70s, colorful comic book advertisements from the Transcience Corporation in New York City promised to mail anyone who sent cash, check, or money order a “bowlfull of happiness” — in reality, a small paper envelope of freeze-dried eggs. Dropped into salt water, the eggs would produce brine shrimp, also known as sea monkeys. Brine shrimp are about a centimeter long and swim upside down, beating their legs madly and trailing their elongated abdomens behind them like tails. As scientists recently learned, these tiny swimmers can do more than just move themselves. Researchers have long thought that in a turbulent system like a current of water, energy flows in only one direction, from larger scales to smaller ones, or vice versa, depending on the system’s dimensions. But in observing the humble brine shrimp, scientists at the University of Pittsburgh realized that — with just a tiny adjustment — the flow of energy could be reversed. The scientists discovered that they could direct the cascade of energy in a two-dimensional system by disrupting the system’s flow with a small obstacle, as long as it was angled just right. “The geometry matters,” said Lei Fang , the Pittsburgh engineer who led the new study. The discovery capitalized on a fundamental, if often unrecognized, mathematical description of how forces interact to push energy through a system, said Gregory Falkovich, a physicist at the Weizmann Institute of Science and a pioneer in the study of turbulent two-dimensional systems. “This is a beautiful and skillful experimental work.” These findings could extend to larger, more chaotic systems, including those in three dimensions. The work has implications for our understanding of fluid dynamics and may have applications in areas such as pollution control and drug design. Brine shrimp are tiny invertebrates that inhabit waters with high salt concentration. They grow to about 10 millimeters long, the width of a pencil eraser. Nature Picture Library/Alamy A Cascade of Chaos Turbulence is hard to miss. It stirs the raucous foam at the base of a waterfall and shapes the crest of a breaking wave. It’s behind the bumpiness of a flight, the swirls of

(read from: https://www.quantamagazine.org/sea-monkeys-show-scientists-how-to-rewrite-a-rule-of-turbulence-20261002/)

---
source: fetch_and_read
