Interpersonal relationship - Wikipedia Jump to content From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Strong, deep, or close association or acquaintance between two or more people "Companionship" redirects here. For the album, see Companionship (album) . For the anarchist use, see Anarchist companionship . "Human relations" redirects here. For the journal, see Human Relations . For the theory, see Human relations movement . This article may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards . The specific problem is: The article should be more coherent, and its content should be checked for relevance and quality. Please help improve this article if you can. ( June 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Relationships ( Outline ) Types Genetic or adoptive Kinship Family Stepfamily Parent Father Mother Son Daughter Grandparent Sibling Brother Sister Cousin Aunt Uncle Niece and nephew By marriage Spouse Husband Wife Open marriage Polygamy Polyandry Polygyny Group marriage Mixed-orientation Partner(s) Significant other Boyfriend Girlfriend Cohabitation Long-distance Online Same-sex Queerplatonic Intimate and sexual Casual Committed Monogamy Non-monogamy Mutual monogamy Polyamory Polyfidelity Affair Cicisbeo Concubinage Courtesan Mistress Activities Bonding Courtship Dating Engagement Bachelor's Day Mating Meet market Romance Singles event Wedding Endings Breakup Ghosting Legal / marital separation Annulment Divorce Widowhood Emotions and feelings Affinity Attachment Intimacy Jealousy Love Friend zone Passionate and companionate Platonic Romance Romantic friendship Unconditional Passion Sexuality Non-romantic friendship Alliance Cross-sex Female Male Practices Bride price dower dowry service Homogamy Hypergamy Infidelity Sexual activity Transgression Repression Abuse Child Dating Domestic Elderly Narcissistic parent Controlling behavior Stalking v t e Part of a series on Love Red heart icon Types of love Affection At first sight Being in love Broken heart Compassionate Conjugal Courtly love Falling in love Greek words Agape Eros Philia Storgḗ Xenia Infatuation Limerence Love addiction Lovesickness Obsessive Parental Passionate and companionate Platonic Puppy love Romance Self-love Amour de soi Amour-propre Unconditional Unrequited Types of relationship Affair Bonding Committed Courtship Friendship cross-sex romantic zone Interpersonal Intimate Living apart together Long-distance Love triangle Marriage On-again, off-again Pair bond Queerplatonic Social views Anarchist Free love Chinese Yuanfen Greek Religious Confucian Ren Indian Bhakti Bhakti yoga Kama Maitrī Islamic Ishq Jewish Chesed Christian Caritas Love of Christ Love of God Portuguese Saudade Yaghan Mamihlapinatapai Concepts Bhakti yoga Biology of romantic love Interpersonal attraction Love deities Love of God Love letter Love magic Valentine's Day Philosophy Physical attractiveness Theories of love Attachment theory Color wheel theory Reward theory Triangular theory v t e Part of a series on Psychology Outline History Subfields Basic psychology Abnormal Affective neuroscience Affective science Behavioral genetics Behavioral neuroscience Behaviorism Cognitive / Cognitivism Cognitive neuroscience Social Comparative Cross-cultural Cultural Developmental Differential Ecological Evolutionary Experimental Gestalt Intelligence Mathematical Moral Neuropsychology Perception Personality Psycholinguistics Psychophysiology Quantitative Social Theoretical Applied psychology Anomalistic Applied behavior analysis Art Assessment Aviation Biography of famous people Clinical Coaching Color Community Consumer Counseling Critical Crowd Educational Ergonomics Fashion Feminist Food Forensic police Health History Humanistic Industrial and organizational Legal Media Medical Military Music Occupational health Pastoral Peace and war Political Positive Photography Psychometrics Psychotherapy Religion School Sex differences Space Sport and exercise Suicidology Systems Trading Traffic Concepts Behavior Behavioral engineering Behavioral genetics Behavioral neuroscience Cognition Competence Consciousness Consumer behavior Emotions Feelings Human factors and ergonomics Intelligence Maslow's hierarchy of needs Mental state Mind Psychology of religion Psychometrics Sex differences Terror management theory Lists Counseling topics Disciplines Organizations Outline Psychologists Psychotherapies Research methods Schools of thought Timeline Topics Psychology portal v t e In social psychology , an interpersonal relation (or interpersonal relationship ) describes a social association, connection , or affiliation between two or more people. It overlaps significantly with the concept of social relations , which are the fundamental unit of analysis within the social sciences . Relations vary in degrees of intimacy, self-disclosure, duration, reciprocity, and power distribution. The main themes or trends of the interpersonal relations are: family , kinship , friendship , love , marriage , business , employment , clubs , neighborhoods , ethical values , support, and solidarity . Interpersonal relations may be regulated by law , custom , or mutual agreement, and form the basis of social groups and societies . They appear when people communicate or act with each other within specific social contexts , [ 1 ] and they thrive on equitable and reciprocal compromises . [ 2 ] Interdisciplinary analysis of relationships draws heavily upon the other social sciences, including, but not limited to: anthropology , communication , cultural studies , economics , linguistics , mathematics , political science , social work , and sociology . This scientific analysis had evolved during the 1990s and has become " relationship science ", [ 3 ] through the research done by Ellen Berscheid and Elaine Hatfield . This interdisciplinary science attempts to provide evidence-based conclusions through the use of data analysis . Types [ edit ] Friendship [ edit ] Friendships are non-sexual, non-romantic interpersonal relationships. [ 4 ] Social relations can be homosocial such as female bonding and male bonding or heterosocial such as cross-sex friendship . In some countries a reduction of friendships is observed, also called friendship recession or loneliness epidemic . Intimate or sexual relationships [ edit ] Main article: Intimate relationship An intimate relationship is an interpersonal relationship that involves emotional or physical closeness between people and may include sexual intimacy and feelings of romance or love. [ 5 ] Intimate relationships are interdependent , and the members of the relationship mutually influence each other. [ 6 ] The quality and nature of the relationship depends on the interactions between individuals, and is derived from the unique context and history that builds between people over time. [ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] Romantic relationships [ edit ] Romantic relationships have been defined in countless ways, by writers, philosophers, religions, scientists, and in the modern day, relationship counselors. Theories of love include Sternberg's triangular theory of love and biology of romantic love . [ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] Sternberg defines love in terms of intimacy, passion, and commitment , which he claims exist in varying levels in different romantic relationships. Romantic relationships can have great social and cultural variability, [ 13 ] and may for example exist without any sexual intimacy , between people of any gender , or among a group of people, as in polyamory or open relationships . Romance [ edit ] Main article: Romance (love) While many individuals recognize the single defining quality of a romantic relationship as the presence of love, it is impossible for romantic relationships to survive without the component of interpersonal communication. Within romantic relationships, love is therefore equally difficult to define. Hazan and Shaver [ 14 ] define love, using Ainsworth's attachment theory, as comprising proximity, emotional support, self-exploration, and separation distress when parted from the loved one. Other components commonly associated with love are physical attraction, similarity, [ 15 ] reciprocity, [ 11 ] and self-disclosure. [ 16 ] Life stages [ edit ] Early adolescent relationships are characterized by companionship, reciprocity, and sexual experiences. As emerging adults mature, they begin to develop attachment and caring qualities in their relationships, including love, bonding, security, and support for partners. Earlier relationships also tend to be shorter and exhibit greater involvement with social networks. [ 17 ] Later relationships are often marked by shrinking social networks, as the couple dedicates more time to each other than to associates. [ 18 ] Later relationships also tend to exhibit higher levels of commitment. [ 17 ] Most psychologists and relationship counselors predict a decline of intimacy and passion over time, replaced by a greater emphasis on companionate love (differing from adolescent companionate love in the caring, committed, and partner-focused qualities). However, couple studies have found no decline in intimacy nor in the importance of sex, intimacy, and passionate love to those in longer or later-life relationships. [ 19 ] Older people tend to be more satisfied in their relationships, but face greater barriers to entering new relationships than do younger or middle-aged people. [ 20 ] Older women in particular face social, demographic, and personal barriers; men aged 65 and older are nearly twice as likely as women to be married, and widowers are nearly three times as likely to be dating 18 months following their partner's loss compared to widows. Significant other [ edit ] The term significant other gained popularity during the 1990s, reflecting the growing acceptance of 'non-heteronormative' relationships. It can be used to avoid making an assumption about the gender or relational status (e.g. married, cohabitating, civil union) of a person's intimate partner. Cohabiting relationships continue to rise, with many partners considering cohabitation to be nearly as serious as, or a substitute for, marriage. [ 20 ] In particular, LGBTQ+ people often face unique challenges in establishing and maintaining intimate relationships. The strain of internalized discrimination, socially ingrained or homophobia , transphobia and other forms of discrimination against LGBTQ+ people, and social pressure of presenting themselves in line with socially acceptable gender norms can affect their health, quality of life , satisfaction, emotions etc. inside and outside their relationships. [ 21 ] [ 22 ] [ 23 ] LGBTQ+ youth also lack the social support and peer connections enjoyed by hetero-normative young people. [ 24 ] Nonetheless, comparative studies of homosexual and heterosexual couples have found few differences in relationship intensity, quality, satisfaction, or commitment. [ 25 ] Marital relationship [ edit ] Although nontraditional relationships continue to rise, marriage still makes up the majority of relationships except among emerging adults. [ 26 ] It is also still considered by many to occupy a place of greater importance among family and social structures. Family relationships [ edit ] Parent – child [ edit ] In ancient times, parent – child relationships were often marked by fear, either of rebellion or abandonment, resulting in the strict filial roles in, for example, ancient Rome and China. [ 27 ] [ 28 ] Freud conceived of the Oedipal complex , the supposed obsession that young boys have towards their mothers and the accompanying fear and rivalry with their fathers, and the Electra complex , in which the young girl feels that her mother has castrated her and therefore becomes obsessed with her father. Freud's ideas influenced thought on parent – child relationships for decades. [ 29 ] Another early conception of parent–child relationships was that love only existed as a biological drive for survival and comfort on the child's part. [ 30 ] In 1958, however, Harry Harlow 's study "The Hot Wire Mother'' comparing rhesus' reactions to wire surrogate "mothers" and cloth "mothers" demonstrated that affection was wanted by any caregiver and not only the surrogate mothers. [ 31 ] The study laid the groundwork for Mary Ainsworth 's attachment theory , showing how the infants used their cloth "mothers" as a secure base from which to explore. [ 32 ] [ 33 ] In a series of studies using the strange situation , a scenario in which an infant is separated from then reunited with the parent, Ainsworth defined three styles of parent-child relationship. Securely attached infants miss the parent, greet them happily upon return, and show normal exploration and lack of fear when the parent is present. Insecure avoidant infants show little distress upon separation and ignore the caregiver when they return. They explore little when the parent is present. Infants also tend to be emotionally unavailable. [ 34 ] Insecure ambivalent infants are highly distressed by separation, but continue to be distressed upon the parent's return; these infants also explore little and display fear even when the parent is present. Some psychologists have suggested a fourth attachment style, disorganized , so called because the infants' behavior appeared disorganized or disoriented. [ 35 ] Secure attachments are linked to better social and academic outcomes and greater moral internalization as research proposes the idea that parent-child relationships play a key role in the developing morality of young children. Secure attachments are also linked to less delinquency for children, and have been found to predict later relationship success. [ 36 ] [ 37 ] [ 11 ] For most of the late nineteenth through the twentieth century, the perception of adolescent-parent relationships was that of a time of upheaval. G. Stanley Hall popularized the "Sturm und drang", or storm and stress, model of adolescence. [ 38 ] Psychological research has painted a much tamer picture. Although adolescents are more risk-seeking and emerging adults have higher suicide rates, they are largely less volatile and have much better relationships with their parents than the storm and stress model would suggest. [ 39 ] Early adolescence often marks a decline in parent-child relationship quality, which then re-stabilizes through adolescence, and relationships are sometimes better in late adolescence than prior to its onset. [ 40 ] With the increasing average age at marriage and more youths attending college and living with parents past their teens, the concept of a new period called emerging adulthood gained popularity. This is considered a period of uncertainty and experimentation between adolescence and adulthood. During this stage, interpersonal relationships are considered to be more self-focused, and relationships with parents may still be influential. [ 41 ] Siblings [ edit ] Sibling relationships have a profound effect on social, psychological, emotional, and academic outcomes. Although proximity and contact usually decreases over time, sibling bonds continue to have effect throughout their lives. Sibling bonds are one of few enduring relationships humans may experience. Sibling relationships are affected by parent-child relationships, such that sibling relationships in childhood often reflect the positive or negative aspects of children's relationships with their parents. [ 42 ] Professional [ edit ] This section may need to be rewritten to comply with Wikipedia's quality standards . Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . You can help . The talk page may contain suggestions. ( June 2025 ) Business is generally held [ by whom? ] to be distinct from personal relations, a contrasting mode which other than excursions from the norm is based on non-personal interest and rational rather than emotional concerns. [ citation needed ] Business relationships Partnership Employer and employee Contractor Customer Landlord and tenant Co-worker Other [ edit ] Alliance Enemy Frenemy — a person with whom an individual maintains a friendly interaction despite underlying conflict, possibly encompassing rivalry, mistrust, jealousy or competition [ 43 ] Neighbor Familiar stranger Official Stages [ edit ] Interpersonal relationships are dynamic systems that change continuously during their existence, and have a beginning, a lifespan, and an end. They tend to grow and improve gradually, as people become acquainted and become closer emotionally, or they gradually deteriorate as people drift apart, move on with their lives and form new relationships with others. One of the most influential [ according to whom? ] models of relationship development was proposed by psychologist George Levinger . [ 44 ] This model was formulated to describe heterosexual, adult romantic relationships, but it has been applied to other kinds of interpersonal relations as well. [ citation needed ] According to the model, the natural development of a relationship follows five stages: Acquaintance and acquaintanceship – Becoming acquainted depends on previous relationships, physical proximity , first impressions , and a variety of other factors. If two people begin to like each other, continued interactions may lead to the next stage, but acquaintance can continue indefinitely. Another example is the association. Buildup – During this stage, people begin to trust and care about each other. The need for intimacy, compatibility and such filtering agents as common background and goals will influence whether or not interaction continues. Continuation – This stage follows a mutual commitment to quite a strong and close long-term friendship, romantic relationship, or even marriage. It is generally a long, relatively stable period. Nevertheless, continued growth and development will occur during this time. Mutual trust is important for sustaining the relationship. Deterioration – Not all relationships deteriorate, but those that do tend to show signs of trouble. Boredom, resentment, and dissatisfaction may occur, and individuals may communicate less and avoid self-disclosure . Loss of trust and betrayals may take place as the downward spiral continues, eventually ending the relationship. (Alternately, the participants may find some way to resolve the problems and reestablish trust and belief in others.) Ending – The final stage marks the end of the relationship, either by breakups, death or by spatial separation for quite some time and severing all existing ties of either friendship or romantic love . Ways that interpersonal relationships begin [ edit ] Proximity: Proximity increases the chance of repeated exposure to the same person. Long-term exposure that can develop familiarity is more likely to trigger like or hate. [ 45 ] Technological advance: The Internet removes the problem of lack of communication due to long distance. People can communicate with others who live far away from them through video calls or text. Internet is a medium for people to be close to others who are not physically near them. [ 45 ] Similarity: People prefer to make friends with others who are similar to them because their thoughts and feelings are more likely to be understood. [ 45 ] Terminating a relationship [ edit ] According to the latest Systematic Review of the Economic Literature on the Factors associated with Life Satisfaction (dating from 2007), stable and secure relationships are beneficial, and correspondingly, relationship dissolution is harmful. [ 46 ] The American Psychological Association has summarized the evidence on breakups . Breaking up can actually be a positive experience when the relationship did not expand the self and when the breakup leads to personal growth. They also recommend some ways to cope with the experience: Purposefully focusing on the positive aspects of the breakup ("factors leading up to the break-up, the actual break-up, and the time right after the break-up