Adaptation - Wikipedia Jump to content From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Evolutionary process This article is about the evolutionary process. For other uses, see Adaptation (disambiguation) . Not to be confused with Adoption or Acclimatization . Part of a series on Evolutionary biology Darwin's finches by John Gould Index Introduction Main Outline Glossary Evidence History Processes and outcomes Population genetics Quantitative genetics Variation Diversity Mutation Natural selection Adaptation Polymorphism Genetic drift Gene flow Speciation Adaptive radiation Cooperation Coevolution Coextinction Contingency Divergence Convergence Parallel evolution Extinction Natural history Origin of life Common descent History of life Timeline of evolution Human evolution Recent human evolution Phylogeny Biodiversity Biogeography Classification Evolutionary taxonomy Cladistics Transitional fossil Extinction event History of evolutionary theory Overview Scientific Revolution Before Darwin Darwin Origin of Species Before synthesis Modern synthesis Molecular evolution Evo-devo Current research History of speciation History of paleontology ( timeline ) Fields and applications Applications of evolution Biosocial criminology Ecological genetics Evolutionary aesthetics Evolutionary anthropology Evolutionary ecology Evolutionary economics Evolutionary epistemology Evolutionary ethics Evolutionary game theory Evolutionary linguistics Evolutionary medicine Evolutionary neuroscience Evolutionary physiology Evolutionary psychology Experimental evolution Invasion genetics Island biogeography Phylogenetics Paleontology Selective breeding Speciation experiments Sociobiology Systematics Universal Darwinism Social implications Eugenics Evolution as fact and theory Dysgenics Social effects Creation–evolution controversy Theistic evolution Objections to evolution Level of support Nature-nurture controversy Evolutionary biology portal Category v t e Complex systems Topics Self-organization Emergence Collective behavior Social dynamics Collective intelligence Collective action Self-organized criticality Herd mentality Phase transition Agent-based modelling Synchronization Ant colony optimization Particle swarm optimization Swarm behaviour Collective consciousness Networks Scale-free networks Social network analysis Small-world networks Centrality Motifs Graph theory Scaling Robustness Systems biology Dynamic networks Adaptive networks Evolution and adaptation Artificial neural network Evolutionary computation Genetic algorithms Genetic programming Artificial life Machine learning Evolutionary developmental biology Artificial intelligence Evolutionary robotics Evolvability Pattern formation Fractals Reaction–diffusion systems Partial differential equations Dissipative structures Percolation Cellular automata Spatial ecology Self-replication Geomorphology Systems theory and cybernetics Autopoiesis Conversation theory Entropy Feedback Goal-oriented Homeostasis Information theory Operationalization Second-order cybernetics Self-reference System dynamics Systems science Systems thinking Sensemaking Variety Theory of computation Nonlinear dynamics Time series analysis Ordinary differential equations Phase space Attractors Population dynamics Chaos Multistability Bifurcation Coupled map lattices Game theory Prisoner's dilemma Rational choice theory Bounded rationality Evolutionary game theory v t e In biology , adaptation has three related meanings. Firstly, it is the dynamic evolutionary process of natural selection that fits organisms to their environment, enhancing their evolutionary fitness . Secondly, it is a state reached by the population during that process. Thirdly, it is a phenotypic trait or adaptive trait , with a functional role in each individual organism , that is maintained and has evolved through natural selection. Historically, adaptation has been described from the time of the ancient Greek philosophers such as Empedocles and Aristotle . In 18th and 19th-century natural theology , adaptation was taken as evidence for the existence of a deity. Charles Darwin and Alfred Russel Wallace proposed instead that it was explained by natural selection. Adaptation is related to biological fitness , which governs the rate of evolution as measured by changes in allele frequencies . Often, two or more species co-adapt and co-evolve as they develop adaptations that interlock with those of the other species, such as with flowering plants and pollinating insects . In mimicry , species evolve to resemble other species; in mimicry this is a mutually beneficial co-evolution as each of a group of strongly defended species (such as wasps able to sting) come to advertise their defences in the same way. Features evolved for one purpose may be co-opted for a different one, as when the insulating feathers of dinosaurs were co-opted for bird flight . Adaptation is a major topic in the philosophy of biology , as it concerns function and purpose ( teleology ). Some biologists try to avoid terms which imply purpose in adaptation, not least because they suggest a deity's intentions, but others note that adaptation is necessarily purposeful. History [ edit ] Main article: History of evolutionary thought Adaptation is an observable fact of life accepted by philosophers and natural historians from ancient times, independently of their views on evolution , but their explanations differed. Empedocles did not believe that adaptation required a final cause (a purpose), but thought that it "came about naturally, since such things survived." Aristotle did believe in final causes, but assumed that species were fixed . [ 1 ] The second of Jean-Baptiste Lamarck 's two factors (the first being a complexifying force) was an adaptive force that causes animals with a given body plan to adapt to circumstances by inheritance of acquired characteristics , creating a diversity of species and genera . In natural theology , adaptation was interpreted as the work of a deity and as evidence for the existence of God. [ 2 ] William Paley believed that organisms were perfectly adapted to the lives they led, an argument that shadowed Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz , who had argued that God had brought about " the best of all possible worlds ." Voltaire 's satire Dr. Pangloss [ 3 ] is a parody of this optimistic idea, and David Hume also argued against design. [ 4 ] Charles Darwin broke with the tradition by emphasising the flaws and limitations which occurred in the animal and plant worlds. [ 5 ] Jean-Baptiste Lamarck proposed a tendency for organisms to become more complex, moving up a ladder of progress, plus "the influence of circumstances", usually expressed as use and disuse . [ 6 ] This second, subsidiary element of his theory is what is now called Lamarckism , a proto-evolutionary hypothesis of the inheritance of acquired characteristics , intended to explain adaptations by natural means. [ 7 ] Other natural historians, such as Buffon , accepted adaptation, and some also accepted evolution, without voicing their opinions as to the mechanism. This illustrates the real merit of Darwin and Alfred Russel Wallace , and secondary figures such as Henry Walter Bates , for putting forward a mechanism whose significance had only been glimpsed previously. A century later, experimental field studies and breeding experiments by people such as E. B. Ford and Theodosius Dobzhansky produced evidence that natural selection was not only the 'engine' behind adaptation, but was a much stronger force than had previously been thought. [ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] General principles [ edit ] The significance of an adaptation can only be understood in relation to the total biology of the species. — Julian Huxley , Evolution: The Modern Synthesis [ 11 ] What adaptation is [ edit ] Adaptation is primarily a process rather than a physical form or part of a body. [ 12 ] An internal parasite (such as a liver fluke ) can illustrate the distinction: such a parasite may have a very simple bodily structure, but nevertheless the organism is highly adapted to its specific environment. From this we see that adaptation is not just a matter of visible traits: in such parasites critical adaptations take place in the life cycle , which is often quite complex. [ 13 ] However, as a practical term, "adaptation" often refers to a product : those features of a species which result from the process. Many aspects of an animal or plant can be correctly called adaptations, though there are always some features whose function remains in doubt. By using the term adaptation for the evolutionary process , and adaptive trait for the bodily part or function (the product), one may distinguish the two different senses of the word. [ 14 ] [ 15 ] [ 16 ] [ 17 ] Adaptation is one of the two main processes that explain the observed diversity of species, such as the different species of Darwin's finches . The other process is speciation , in which new species arise, typically through reproductive isolation . [ 18 ] [ 19 ] An example widely used today to study the interplay of adaptation and speciation is the evolution of cichlid fish in African lakes, where the question of reproductive isolation is complex. [ 20 ] [ 21 ] Adaptation is not always a simple matter where the ideal phenotype evolves for a given environment. An organism must be viable at all stages of its development and at all stages of its evolution. This places constraints on the evolution of development, behaviour, and structure of organisms. The main constraint, over which there has been much debate, is the requirement that each genetic and phenotypic change during evolution should be relatively small, because developmental systems are so complex and interlinked. However, it is not clear what "relatively small" should mean, for example polyploidy in plants is a reasonably common large genetic change. [ 22 ] The origin of eukaryotic endosymbiosis is a more dramatic example. [ 23 ] All adaptations help organisms survive in their ecological niches . The adaptive traits may be structural, behavioural or physiological . Structural adaptations are physical features of an organism, such as shape, body covering, armament, and internal organization . Behavioural adaptations are inherited systems of behaviour, whether inherited in detail as instincts , or as a neuropsychological capacity for learning . Examples include searching for food , mating , and vocalizations . Physiological adaptations permit the organism to perform special functions such as making venom , secreting slime , and phototropism , but also involve more general functions such as growth and development , temperature regulation , ionic balance and other aspects of homeostasis . Adaptation affects all aspects of the life of an organism. [ 24 ] The following definitions are given by the evolutionary biologist Theodosius Dobzhansky : 1. Adaptation is the evolutionary process whereby populations of organisms become better able to live in a habitat or habitats. [ 25 ] [ 26 ] [ 27 ] 2. Adaptedness is the state of being adapted: the degree to which an organism is able to live and reproduce in a given set of habitats. [ 28 ] 3. An adaptive trait is an aspect of the developmental pattern of the organism which enables or enhances the probability of that organism surviving and reproducing. [ 29 ] What adaptation is not [ edit ] The common kestrel has adapted successfully to urban areas Adaptation differs from flexibility, acclimatization , and learning, all of which are changes during life which are not inherited. Flexibility deals with the relative capacity of an organism to maintain itself in different habitats: its degree of specialization . Acclimatization describes automatic physiological adjustments during life; [ 30 ] learning means alteration in behavioural performance during life. [ 31 ] Flexibility stems from phenotypic plasticity , the ability of an organism with a given genotype (genetic type) to change its phenotype (observable characteristics) in response to changes in its habitat , or to move to a different habitat. [ 32 ] [ 33 ] The degree of flexibility is inherited, and varies between individuals. A highly specialized animal or plant lives only in a well-defined habitat, eats a specific type of food, and cannot survive if its needs are not met. Many herbivores are like this; extreme examples are koalas which depend on Eucalyptus , and giant pandas which require bamboo . A generalist, on the other hand, eats a range of food, and can survive in many different conditions. Examples are humans, rats, crabs and many carnivores. The tendency to behave in a specialized or exploratory manner is inherited—it is an adaptation. Rather different is developmental flexibility: "An animal or plant is developmentally flexible if when it is raised in or transferred to new conditions, it changes in structure so that it is better fitted to survive in the new environment," writes the evolutionary biologist John Maynard Smith . [ 34 ] If humans move to a higher altitude, respiration and physical exertion become a problem, but after spending time in high altitude conditions they acclimatize to the reduced partial pressure of oxygen, such as by producing more red blood cells . The ability to acclimatize is an adaptation, but the acclimatization itself is not. The reproductive rate declines, but deaths from some tropical diseases also go down. Over a longer period of time, some people are better able to reproduce at high altitudes than others. They contribute more heavily to later generations, and gradually by natural selection the whole population becomes adapted to the new conditions. This has demonstrably occurred, as the observed performance of long-term communities at higher altitude is significantly better than the performance of new arrivals, even when the new arrivals have had time to acclimatize. [ 35 ] Adaptedness and fitness [ edit ] Main articles: Fitness (biology) and Fitness landscape There is a relationship between adaptedness and the concept of fitness used in population genetics . Differences in fitness between genotypes predict the rate of evolution by natural selection. Natural selection changes the relative frequencies of alternative phenotypes, insofar as they are heritable . [ 36 ] However, a phenotype with high adaptedness may not have high fitness. Dobzhansky mentioned the example of the Californian redwood , which is highly adapted, but a relict species in danger of extinction . [ 25 ] Elliott Sober commented that adaptation was a retrospective concept since it implied something about the history of a trait, whereas fitness predicts a trait's future. [ 37 ] 1. Relative fitness. The average contribution to the next generation by a genotype or a class of genotypes, relative to the contributions of other genotypes in the population. [ 38 ] This is also known as Darwinian fitness , selection coefficient , and other terms. 2. Absolute fitness. The absolute contribution to the next generation by a genotype or a class of genotypes. Also known as the Malthusian parameter when applied to the population as a whole. [ 36 ] [ 39 ] 3. Adaptedness. The extent to which a phenotype fits its local ecological niche. Researchers can sometimes test this through a reciprocal transplant . [ 40 ] In this sketch of a fitness landscape , a population can evolve by following the arrows to the adaptive peak at point B, and the points A and C are local optima where a population could become trapped. Sewall Wright proposed that populations occupy adaptive peaks on a fitness landscape. To evolve to another, higher peak, a population would first have to pass through a valley of maladaptive intermediate stages, and might be "trapped" on a peak that is not optimally adapted. [ 41 ] Types [ edit ] {{harvnb|Eldredge|1995|p=33}} /ref>"}},"i":0}}]}'/> Adaptation is the heart and soul of evolution. — Niles Eldredge , Reinventing Darwin: The Great Debate at the High Table of Evolutionary Theory [ 42 ] Changes in habitat [ edit ] Before Darwin, adaptation was seen as a fixed relationship between an organism and its habitat. It was not appreciated that as the climate changed, so did the habitat; and as the habitat changed, so did the biota . Also, habitats are subject to changes in their biota: for example, invasions of species from other areas. The relative numbers of species in a given habitat are always changing. Change is the rule, though much depends on the speed and degree of the change.
When the habitat changes, three main things may happen to a resident population: habitat tracking, genetic change or extinction. In fact, all three things may occur in sequence. Of these three effects only genetic change brings about adaptation.
When a habitat changes, the resident population typically moves to more suitable places; this is the typical response of flying insects or oceanic organisms, which have wide (though not unlimited) opportunity for movement. [ 43 ] This common response is called habitat tracking . It is one explanation put forward for the periods of apparent stasis in the fossil record (the punctuated equilibrium theory). [ 44 ] Genetic change [ edit ] Without mutation , the ultimate source of all genetic variation , there would be no genetic changes and no subsequent adaptation through evolution by natural selection. Genetic change occurs in a population when mutation increases or decreases in its initial frequency followed by random genetic drift, migration, recombination or natural selection act on this genetic variation. [ 45 ] One example is that the first pathways of enzyme-based metabolism at the very origin of life on Earth may have been co-opted components of the already-existing purine nucleotide metabolism , a metabolic pathway that evolved in an ancient RNA world . The co-option requires new mutations and through natural selection, the population then adapts genetically to its present circumstances. [ 10 ] Genetic changes may result in entirely new or gradual change to visible structures, or they may adjust physiological activity in a way that suits the habitat. The varying shapes of the beaks of Darwin's finches, for example, are driven by adaptive mutations in the ALX1 gene. [ 46 ] The coat color of different wild mouse species matches their environments, whether black lava or light sand, owing to adaptive mutations in the melanocortin 1 receptor and other melanin pathway genes. [ 47 ] [ 48 ] Physiological resistance to the heart poisons ( cardiac glycosides ) that monarch butterflies store in their bodies to protect themselves from predators [ 49 ] [ 50 ] are driven by adaptive mutations in the target of the poison, the sodium pump , resulting in target site insensitivity. [ 51 ] [ 52 ] [ 53 ] These same adaptive mutations and similar changes at the same amino acid sites were found to evolve in a parallel manner in distantly related insects that feed on the same plants, and even in a bird that feeds on monarchs through convergent evolution , a hallmark of adaptation. [ 54 ] [ 55 ] Convergence at the gene-level across distantly related species can arise because of evolutionary constraint. [ 56 ] Habitats and biota do frequently change over time and space. Therefore, it follows that the process of adaptation is never fully complete. [ 57 ] Over time, it may happen that the environment changes little, and the species comes to fit its surroundings better and better, resulting in stabilizing selection. On the other hand, it may happen that changes in the environment occur suddenly, and then the species becomes less and less well adapted. The only way for it to climb back up that fitness peak is via the introduction of new genetic variation for natural selection to act upon. Seen like this, adaptation is a genetic tracking process , which goes on all the time to some extent, but especially when the population cannot or does not move to another, less 