Verstehen - Wikipedia Jump to content From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Social science conception of understanding and relation Verstehen ( German pronunciation: [ fɛɐˈʃteːən ] ⓘ , literal translation /span>"}]],"parts":[{"template":{"target":{"wt":"lit","href":"./Template:Lit"},"params":{"1":{"wt":"to understand"}},"i":0}}]}'>lit. ' to understand ' ), in the context of German philosophy and social sciences in general, has been used since the late 19th century – in English as in German – with the particular sense of the "interpretive or participatory" examination of social phenomena. [ 1 ] The term is closely associated with the work of the German sociologist Max Weber , whose antipositivism established an alternative to prior sociological positivism and economic determinism , rooted in the analysis of social action . [ 2 ] In anthropology , Verstehen has come to mean a systematic interpretive process in which an outside observer of a culture attempts to relate to it and understand others. Verstehen is now seen as a concept and a method central to a rejection of positivist social science (although Weber appeared to think that the two could be united). Verstehen refers to understanding the meaning of action from the actor's point of view. It is entering into the shoes of the other, and adopting this research stance requires treating the actor as a subject, rather than an object of your observations. It also implies that unlike objects in the natural world human actors are not simply the product of the pulls and pushes of external forces. Individuals are seen to create the world by organizing their own understanding of it and giving it meaning. To do research on actors without taking into account the meanings they attribute to their actions or environment is to treat them like objects. [ 3 ] Meaning [ edit ] Interpretive sociology ( verstehende Soziologie ) is the study of society that concentrates on the meanings people associate to their social world. [ 4 ] Interpretive sociology strives to show that reality is constructed by people themselves in their daily lives. [ 4 ] Verstehen roughly translates to "meaningful understanding" or "putting yourself in the shoes of others to see things from their perspective." Interpretive sociology differs from positivist sociology in three ways: [ 4 ] It deals with the meaning attached to action, unlike positivist sociology which focuses on behavior; It sees reality as being constructed by people, unlike positivist sociology which sees an objective reality "out there;" and It relies on qualitative data, unlike positivist sociology which tends to make use of quantitative data. Dilthey and hermeneutics [ edit ] Verstehen was introduced into philosophy and the human sciences ( Geisteswissenschaften ) by the German historist philosopher Johann Gustav Droysen . Droysen first made a distinction between nature and history in terms of the categories of space and time. The method of the natural sciences ( Naturwissenschaften ) is explanation ( erklären ), while that of history is understanding ( verstehen ). [ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] The concept of Verstehen was later used by the German philosopher Wilhelm Dilthey [ 9 ] [ 10 ] to describe the first-person participatory perspective that agents have on their individual experience as well as their culture, history, and society. In this sense, it is developed in the context of the theory and practice of interpretation (as understood in the context of hermeneutics ) and contrasted with the external objectivating third-person perspective of explanation ( das Erklären ) in which human agency, subjectivity, and its products are analyzed as effects of impersonal natural forces in the natural sciences and social structures in sociology. [ citation needed ] Twentieth-century philosophers such as Martin Heidegger and Hans-Georg Gadamer [ 11 ] were critical of what they considered to be the romantic and subjective character of Verstehen in Dilthey, although both Dilthey and the early Heidegger were interested in the " facticity " and "life-context" of understanding, and sought to universalize it as the way humans exist through language on the basis of ontology . [ 12 ] [ 13 ] Verstehen also played a role in Edmund Husserl and Alfred Schutz 's analysis of the " lifeworld ." Jürgen Habermas and Karl-Otto Apel further transformed the concept of Verstehen , reformulating it on the basis of a transcendental-pragmatic philosophy of language and the theory of communicative action. [ citation needed ] Weber and the social sciences [ edit ] Max Weber and Georg Simmel [ 14 ] introduced interpretive understanding ( Verstehen ) into sociology , where it has come to mean a systematic interpretive process in which an outside observer of a culture (such as an anthropologist or sociologist ) relates to an indigenous people or sub-cultural group on their own terms and from their own point of view, rather than interpreting them in terms of the observer's own culture. [ 15 ] Verstehen can mean either a kind of empathic or participatory understanding of social phenomena. In anthropological terms this is sometimes described as cultural relativism , especially by those that have a tendency to argue toward universal ideals. In sociology it is an aspect of the comparative-historical approach, where the context of a society like twelfth century "France" can be potentially better understood ( besserverstehen ) by the sociologist than it could have been by people living in a village in Burgundy. It relates to how people in life give meaning to the social world around them and how the social scientist accesses and evaluates this "first-person perspective." This concept has been both expanded and criticized by later social scientists. Proponents laud this concept as the only means by which researchers from one culture can examine and explain behaviors in another. While the exercise of Verstehen has been more popular among social scientists in Europe , such as Habermas, Verstehen was introduced into the practice of sociology in the United States by Talcott Parsons , an American sociologist influenced by Max Weber . Parsons used his structural functionalism to incorporate this concept into his 1937 work, The Structure of Social Action . [ 16 ] Weber had more specific beliefs than Marx where he put value to understanding and meaning of key elements—not just with intuition or sympathy with the individual but also the product of "systematic and rigorous research". The goal is to identify human actions and interpreting them as observable events leading us to believe that it not only provides for a good explanation for individual actions but also for group interactions. The meaning attached needs to include constraints and limitations and analyze the motivation for action. Weber believed that this gives the sociologist an advantage over a natural scientist because "We can accomplish something which is never attainable in the natural sciences, namely the subjective understanding of the action of the component individuals." [ 17 ] Criticism [ edit ] This section may need to be rewritten to comply with Wikipedia's quality standards , as it lacks both sources and clarity. Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . You can help . The talk page may contain suggestions. ( January 2022 ) Critics of the social scientific concept of Verstehen such as Mikhail Bakhtin and Dean MacCannell counter that it is simply impossible for a person born of one culture to ever completely understand another culture, and that it is arrogant and conceited to attempt to interpret the significance of one culture's symbols through the terms of another (supposedly superior) culture. [ citation needed ] Just as in physical science all knowledge is asymptotic to the full explanation, a high degree of cross-cultural understanding is very valuable. The opposite of Verstehen would seem to be ignorance of all but that which is immediately observable, meaning that we would not be able to understand any time and place but our own. A certain level of interpretive understanding is necessary for our own cultural setting, however, and it can easily be argued that even the full participant in a culture does not fully understand it in every regard. [ citation needed ] Critics also believe that it is the sociologist's job to not just observe people and what people do but also share in their world of meaning and come to appreciate why they act as they do. Subjective thoughts and feelings regarded as bias in the sciences is an important aspect to be controlled for while doing sociological research. [ 18 ] See also [ edit ] Society portal Antinaturalism (sociology) Emic and etic Humanistic sociology Humanistic coefficient Nomothetic and idiographic Reflexivity (social theory) References [ edit ] ↑ "Verstehen: The Sociology of Max Weber" . Archived from the original on 2011-03-07 . Retrieved 2011-03-07 . ↑ "Anti-positivism" Archived April 3, 2012, at the Wayback Machine at Historylearningsite.co.uk ↑ "Verstehen ." Online Dictionary of the Social Sciences . 1 2 3 Macionis, John, and Linda Gerber. 2010. Sociology (7th ed.). ↑ Droysen, J. Gustav , Historik: Vorlesungen über Enzyklopädie und Methodologie der Geschichte . Stuttgart: Fromann-Holzboog, 1977 [1858]: 22, 150f. ↑ Droysen, J. Gustav . 1862. Grundriss der Historik. Berlin: Verlag von Veit Comp. p. 4ff. ↑ Droysen, J. Gustav . 1868. Grundriss der Historik . Berlin: Verlag von Veit Comp. Pp. 11–4. ↑ Udehn, Lars. 2001. Methodological Individualism: Background, History and Meaning . London: Routledge. p. 27. ↑ Dilthey, Wilhelm . 1894. Ideen über eine beschreibende und zergliedernde Psychologie. Berlin. p. 1314. ↑ Dilthey, Wilhelm . 1991. Introduction to the Human Sciences . Princeton: Princeton University Press . ↑ Gadamer, Hans-Georg . 1989. Truth and Method . Crossroad. ↑ Martin Heidegger, Ontology: The Hermeneutics of Facticity , Indiana University Press, 1999. ↑ Charles R. Bambach , Heidegger, Dilthey, and the crisis of historicism , Cornell University Press, 1995, p. 199–200. ↑ Simmel, Georg . 1920. Die probleme der Gechichtsphilosophie. Eine erkentnistheoretische Studie . Munich: Verlag von Dunker und Humboldt. ↑ Macionis, Gerber, John, Linda (2011). Sociology . Toronto, ON: Pearson Canada Inc. pp. 32– 33. ISBN 978-0-13-700161-3 . {{ cite book }} : CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ↑ Gerber, John J. Macionis, Linda M. (2011). Sociology (7th Canadian ed.). Toronto: Pearson Canada. ISBN 978-0-13-700161-3 . {{ cite book }} : CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ↑ Gingrich, Paul. "Weber, Economy and Society" . Sociology 250 . University of Regina Department of Sociology and Social Studies. p. 15 . Retrieved 21 February 2012 . ↑ Macionis, John; Gerber, Linda (2011). Sociology . Toronto, ON: Pearson Canada Inc. p. 33. ISBN 978-0-13-700161-3 . External links [ edit ] The dictionary definition of verstehen at Wiktionary v t e Max Weber Bibliography Books The History of Commercial Partnerships in the Middle Ages (1889) Roman Agrarian History and Its Significance for Public and Private Law (1891) Condition of Farm Labour in Eastern Germany (1892) The Stock Exchange (1896) The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism (1904–05) The Economic Ethics of the World Religions The Religion of China (1915) " Intermediate Reflection on the Economic Ethics of the World Religions " (1916) The Religion of India (1916) Ancient Judaism (1921) Economy and Society (1921–22) Essays " The 'Objectivity' of Knowledge in Social Science and Social Policy " (1904) " The Protestant Sects and the Spirit of Capitalism " (1904) Lectures " Science as a Vocation " (1917) " Politics as a Vocation " (1919) General Economic History (1923) Concepts Bureaucracy Charisma Disenchantment Ethic of ultimate ends Ideal type Inner-worldly asceticism Iron cage Life chances Methodological individualism Monopoly on the legitimate use of force within a given area Patrimonialism Political capitalism Protestant work ethic Rationalisation Social action Affectional Traditional Instrumental Value-rational Three-component theory of stratification Tripartite classification of authority Charismatic Rational-legal Traditional Value-freedom Verstehen People Max Weber Sr. (father) Alfred Weber (brother) Marianne Weber (wife) Else von Richthofen (mistress) Related Verein für Socialpolitik Archiv für Sozialwissenschaft und Sozialpolitik German Sociological Association German Democratic Party Max Weber Center for Advanced Cultural and Social Studies Max Weber Foundation v t e Positivism Perspectives Antihumanism Empiricism Rationalism Scientism Declinations Legal positivism Logical positivism Positivist school Postpositivism Sociological positivism Machian positivism (empirio-criticism) Rankean historical positivism Polish positivism Russian Machism Principal concepts Consilience Demarcation Evidence Induction Justification Pseudoscience Critique of metaphysics Unity of science Verificationism Antitheses Antipositivism Confirmation holism Critical theory Falsifiability Geisteswissenschaft Hermeneutics Historicism Historism Human science Humanities Metaphysics Methodological dualism Problem of induction Reflectivism Related paradigm shifts in the history of science Non-Euclidean geometry (1830s) Uncertainty principle (1927) Related topics Behavioralism Post-behavioralism Critical rationalism Criticism of science Epistemology anarchism idealism nihilism pluralism realism Holism Instrumentalism Modernism Naturalism in literature Nomothetic–idiographic distinction Objectivity in science Operationalism Phenomenalism Philosophy of science Deductive-nomological model Ramsey sentence Sense-data theory Qualitative research Relationship between religion and science Sociology Social science Philosophy Structural functionalism Structuralism Structuration theory Positivist-related debate Method Methodenstreit (1890s) Werturteilsstreit (1909–1959) Positivismusstreit (1960s) Fourth Great Debate in international relations (1980s) Science wars (1990s) Contributions The Course in Positive Philosophy (1830) A General View of Positivism (1848) Critical History of Philosophy (1869) Idealism and Positivism (1879–1884) The Analysis of Sensations (1886) The Logic of Modern Physics (1927) Language, Truth, and Logic (1936) The Two Cultures (1959) The Universe in a Nutshell (2001) Proponents Richard Avenarius A. J. Ayer Berlin Circle / Vienna Circle Alexander Bogdanov Percy Williams Bridgman Auguste Comte Eugen Dühring Émile Durkheim Stephen Hawking Ernst Laas Ernst Mach Ahmed Rıza Criticism Materialism and Empirio-criticism (1909) History and Class Consciousness (1923) The Logic of Scientific Discovery (1934) The Poverty of Historicism (1936) World Hypotheses (1942) Two Dogmas of Empiricism (1951) Truth and Method (1960) The Structure of Scientific Revolutions (1962) Conjectures and Refutations (1963) One-Dimensional Man (1964) Knowledge and Human Interests (1968) The Poverty of Theory (1978) The Scientific Image (1980) The Rhetoric of Economics (1986) Critics Theodor W. Adorno Gaston Bachelard Mario Bunge Wilhelm Dilthey Paul Feyerabend Hans-Georg Gadamer Jürgen Habermas Thomas Kuhn Vladimir Lenin György Lukács Herbert Marcuse Deirdre McCloskey Stephen Pepper Karl Popper Willard Van Orman Quine E. P. Thompson Bas van Fraassen Max Weber Concepts in contention Knowledge Objectivity Phronesis Truth Verstehen Category Authority control databases International Verstehende Soziologie /span>"}]]}'> GND National sociologie compréhensive /span>"}]]}'> France sociologie compréhensive /span>"}]]}'> BnF data Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Verstehen oldid=1372381388 " Categories : 1850s neologisms Critical theory German philosophy German words and phrases Hermeneutics Max Weber Phenomenology Philosophy of social science Social concepts Wilhelm Dilthey Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Pages using the Phonos extension Pages with German IPA Pages including recorded pronunciations Webarchive template wayback links Articles containing German-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2024 CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Wikipedia articles needing rewrite from January 2022 All articles needing rewrite Articles with unsourced statements from November 2011 Articles with unsourced statements from August 2010 Search Search Verstehen 15 languages Add topic