Segment display - Wikipedia Jump to content From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Electronic display device for displaying digits and some letters Digital clocks display changing numerals The common segment displays shown side by side: 7-segment , 9-segment , 14-segment and 16-segment displays A segment display is a display device comprising several segments, which switch on and off to give the appearance of digits or alphanumeric characters. The segments are usually single LEDs or liquid crystals . Segment displays are often used in digital watches and pocket calculators . Common types include seven-segment displays (which are used for numerals only) and alphanumeric fourteen-segment displays and sixteen-segment displays (which can display numerals and Latin alphabet letters). Seven-segment display [ edit ] A typical 7-segment LED display component, with decimal point in a wide DIP -10 package A seven-segment display is a display device for digits and some letters . It is often used in a device to display numbers – for example, in a digital clock or calculator . To a lesser extent, but still common, it is used to display alphanumeric information. Since a seven-segment display tends to be less expensive than a display that can better represent any character and even a graphic image such as a dot matrix display , the design choice to use a seven-segment display is a tradeoff to minimize cost over providing richer functionality. [ 1 ] History [ edit ] Seven-segment representation of figures can be found in patents as early as 1903 (in U.S. patent 1,126,641 ), when Carl Kinsley invented a method of telegraphically transmitting letters and numbers and having them printed on tape in a segmented format. In 1908, F. W. Wood invented an 8-segment display, which displayed the number 4 using a diagonal bar ( U.S. patent 974,943 ). In 1910, a seven-segment display illuminated by incandescent bulbs was used on a power-plant boiler room signal panel. [ 2 ] They were also used to show the dialed telephone number to operators during the transition from manual to automatic telephone dialing. [ 3 ] They did not achieve widespread use until the advent of LEDs in the 1970s. Filament seven-segment display Some early seven-segment displays used incandescent filaments in an evacuated bulb; they are also known as numitrons. [ 4 ] A variation (minitrons) made use of an evacuated potted box. Minitrons are filament segment displays that are housed in DIP ( dual in-line package ) packages like modern LED segment displays. They may have up to 16 segments . [ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] There were also segment displays that used small incandescent light bulbs instead of LEDs or incandescent filaments. These worked similarly to modern LED segment displays. [ 8 ] Vacuum fluorescent display versions were also used in the 1970s. [ 9 ] Many early (c. 1970s) LED seven-segment displays had each digit built on a single die . This made the digits very small. Some included magnifying lenses in the design to try to make the digits more legible. [ 10 ] [ 11 ] Other designs used 1 or 2 dies for every segment of the display. [ 12 ] [ 13 ] Liquid-crystal display (LCD) largely superseded LED seven-segment displays. The shapes of elements in an LCD panel are arbitrary since they are formed on the display by photolithography , while LED segments tend to be simple rectangles , because they have to be physically moulded to shape, which makes it difficult to form more complex shapes. However, the easy recognition of seven-segment displays, and the comparatively high visual contrast obtained by such displays relative to dot-matrix digits, makes seven-segment multiple-digit LCD screens very common on basic calculators . Seven-segment displays have been recommended against for critical information (i.e. information that is dangerous to health or safety if misread) due to misreading if upside down or if segments are "stuck" on or off. [ 14 ] Backlit dot-matrix LCDs have largely superseded seven-segment displays on such equipment. The seven-segment display has inspired type designers to produce typefaces reminiscent of that display (but more legible), such as New Alphabet , "DB LCD Temp", "ION B", etc. The seven-segment pattern is sometimes used in posters or tags, where the user either applies color to pre-printed segments, or applies color through a seven-segment digit template , to compose figures such as product prices or telephone numbers. Seven-segment displays, which use a restricted range of letters that look like (upside-down) digits, are commonly used by school children to form words and phrases using a technique known as " calculator spelling ." Gas station price display Calculator that has a tail on the "7" digit Apollo Guidance Computer control panel reproduction Marantz CD63SE CD player with a vacuum fluorescent display in test mode Marantz CC-45 CD player display A Beijing bus displaying the route number 695 using a seven-segment display Implementations [ edit ] Seven-segment displays may use a liquid-crystal display (LCD), a light-emitting diode (LED) for each segment, an electrochromic display , or other light-generating or -controlling techniques such as cold cathode gas discharge (neon) ( Panaplex ), vacuum fluorescent (VFD), incandescent filaments (Numitron), and others. For gasoline price totems and other large signs, electromechanical seven-segment displays made up of electromagnetically flipped light-reflecting segments are still commonly used. A precursor to the 7-segment display in the 1950s through the 1970s was the cold-cathode, neon-lamp-like nixie tube . Starting in 1970, RCA sold a display device known as the Numitron that used incandescent filaments arranged into a seven-segment display. [ 15 ] In USSR, the first electronic calculator "Vega", which was produced from 1964, contains 20 decimal digits with seven-segment electroluminescent display . [ 16 ] In a simple LED package, typically all of the cathodes (negative terminals) or all of the anodes (positive terminals) of the segment LEDs are connected and brought out to a common pin; this is referred to as a "common cathode" or "common anode" device. [ 17 ] Hence a 7 segment plus decimal point package will only require nine pins, though commercial products typically contain more pins, and/or spaces where pins would go, in order to match standard IC sockets. Integrated displays also exist, with single or multiple digits. Some of these integrated displays incorporate their own internal decoder , though most do not: each individual LED is brought out to a connecting pin as described. Multiple-digit LED displays as used in pocket calculators and similar devices used multiplexed displays to reduce the number of I/O pins required to control the display. For example, all the anodes of the A segments of each digit position would be connected together and to a driver circuit pin, while the cathodes of all segments for each digit would be connected. To operate any particular segment of any digit, the controlling integrated circuit would turn on the cathode driver for the selected digit, and the anode drivers for the desired segments; then after a short blanking interval the next digit would be selected and new segments lit, in a sequential fashion. In this manner an eight digit display with seven segments and a decimal point would require only 8 cathode drivers and 8 anode drivers, instead of sixty-four drivers and IC pins. [ 18 ] Often in pocket calculators the digit drive lines would be used to scan the keyboard as well, providing further savings; however, pressing multiple keys at once would produce odd results on the multiplexed display. Some multiple-digit displays have only two segments on the left, which can only display the number 1. This doubles the range of the display for a modest extra cost in space and silicon. Such displays are referred to by the number of full (7-segment) digits plus one half; for example, a multimeter capable of displaying values up to 1999 volts or 1.999 amperes might have a 3½-digit display. The Newcomb–Benford law implies that adding a 1 on the left might be useful in a larger number of applications than a naïve analysis might suggest. For example, many buildings have a highest floor numbered between 10 and 19, allowing their elevators to use a 1½ digit display. A multiplexed 4-digit, seven-segment display with only 12 pins A 4-digit display scanning by columns to make the number 1.234 X-Ray of an 8-digit 7-segment multiplexed LED display from a 1970s calculator Characters [ edit ] Main article: Seven-segment display character representations Segment names of a seven-segment display with an eighth Decimal Point segment Slanted red seven-segment display with dot The seven segments are arranged as a rectangle, with two vertical segments on each side and one horizontal segment each at the top, middle, and bottom. Often the rectangle is oblique (slanted), which may aid readability. In most applications, the segments are of nearly uniform shape and size (usually elongated hexagons , though trapezoids and rectangles can also be used); though in the case of adding machines , the vertical segments are longer and more oddly shaped at the ends, to try to make them more easily readable. The seven elements of the display can be lit in different combinations to represent each of the Arabic numerals . The individual segments are referred to by the letters "a" to "g", and an optional decimal point (an "eighth segment", referred to as DP) is sometimes used for the display of non-integer numbers. [ 19 ] [ 17 ] A single byte can encode the full state of a seven-segment display, including the decimal point. The most popular bit encodings are gfedcba and abcdefg . In the gfedcba representation, a byte value of 0x06 would turn on segments "c" and "b", which would display a "1" ( ). 16×8 grid showing the 128 states of a seven-segment display [ 20 ] Decimal [ edit ] The numerical digits 0 to 9 are the most common characters displayed on seven-segment displays. The most common patterns used for each of these are: [ 21 ] Alternative patterns: The numeral 1 may be represented with the left segments, the numerals 6 and 9 may be represented without a "tail", and the numeral 7 represented with a "tail": [ 22 ] In Unicode 13.0, 10 codepoints had been given for segmented digits 0–9 in the Symbols for Legacy Computing block, to replicate early computer fonts that included seven-segment versions of the digits. [ 23 ] The official reference shows the less-common four-segment "7" ( ). Hexadecimal [ edit ] The binary-coded decimal (BCD) 0 to 9 digit values require four binary bits to hold their values. Since four bits (2 4 ) can hold 16 values, this means hexadecimal (hex) digits can be represented by four bits too. [ 24 ] Due to the limited number of segments in seven-segment displays, the hexadecimal digits B and D are displayed as lowercase letters to avoid confusion with 8 ( ) and 0 ( ) respectively. [ 25 ] [ 26 ] [ 27 ] [ 28 ] The digit "6" must also be displayed with the topmost segment as to avoid ambiguity with the letter "b" ( ). Early decoder ICs often produced unintuitive patterns or duplicates of digits for 10-15, [ 29 ] as they were designed to use as few gates as possible and only required to produce 0-9. Letters [ edit ] Many letters of the Latin alphabet can be reasonably implemented on a seven-segment display. Though not every letter is available, it is possible to create many useful words. By careful choice of words, one can sometimes work around unavailable letters. Uppercase letters "B", "I", "S", "Z", and "D" "O" conflict with the common seven-segment representation of digits "8", "1", "5", "2", and "0" ( , , , , ) respectively, and the lowercase letter "g" with digit "9" ( ). Upper case I ( ) could be put on the left (as lower-case L is shown here) but this is not often done. Lowercase 'b' and 'q' are identical to the alternate numerical digits '6' and '9' ( , ). Latin alphabet A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Upper Lower Greek alphabet Α Β Γ Δ Ε Ζ Η Θ Ι Κ Λ Μ Ν Ξ Ο Π Ρ Σ Τ Υ Φ Χ Ψ Ω Upper Lower The following are some English word examples seen on actual electronic equipment (first line appeared on some CD players ): , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , , Eight-segment display [ edit ] Eight-segment display of the Sharp EL-8 An eight-segment display is a type of display based on eight segments that can be turned on or off according to the font pattern to be produced. Applications [ edit ] One application was in the Sharp EL-8 , an early electronic calculator. The eight-segment display produces more rounded digits than a seven-segment display , yielding a more "script-like" output, with the trade-off that fewer possible alphabetic characters can be displayed because the bars F and G are merged (see table below). Displaying [ edit ] An eight segment display can sometimes display alphabetic characters with less readability because the segments F and G are combined and the corners are rounded. The asymmetrical layout of the elements produced a distinctive "handwritten" digit style, with a half-height "0". Characters able to be displayed by a seven-segment display but unable to be displayed by an eight-segment display due to graphical confusion Script Characters Latin C, c, d, G, L, N, n, 0, o, r, U, Z, Ə Greek Γ, Ζ, Ν, Ξ, Ο, ο, Π, π Cyrillic Г, г, д, П, п, Э Others 0, (, [, ", ^, -, /, ? Characters What they display as on an eight-segment display C, [, ( E c, L, r, г t d, U Ɐ G 6 N, Ν, λ, Π, П A n, π, п h o, ο b Z, Ζ, e 0, O, Ə, Ο, д 8 Γ, Г F Ξ C̠ Э 9 " ˅ ^ ° - ` / μ ? P Examples [ edit ] Sharp EL-8 with eight-segment displays Eight-segment display displaying an 8 Eight-segment display displaying a D Nine-segment display [ edit ] Nine-segment display Alternate Alternate Alternate An example of a nine-segment alphanumeric character set. Some letters are compromised, and most special characters other than the ones shown here are unable to be rendered without significant compromises that would make them illegible. More variations A nine-segment display is a type of display based on nine segments that can be turned on or off according to the graphic pattern to be produced. It is an extension of the more common seven-segment display , having an additional two diagonal or vertical segments (one between the top and the middle, and the other between the bottom and the horizontal segments). It provides an efficient method of displaying alphanumeric characters. The letters displayed by a nine-segment display are not consistently uppercase or lowercase in shape. A common compromise is to use a lower-case "n" instead of "N". Depending on the design of the display segments, the use of the extra two segments may be avoided whenever possible, as in the Nixxo X-Page "tall" lowercase "r" and "y". Uses [ edit ] Soviet postcodes : Upper image: preprinted at the bottom left corner of an envelope are six nine-segment grids to be filled with the six digits of the postal code. Bottom image: samples of each digit in the grid format. In some Soviet digital calculators of the 1970s, such as the Elektronika 4-71b, 9-segment displays were used to provide basic alphanumerics and avoid confusions with representing numbers in Soviet postcodes . "},"alt2":{"wt":"Letter {{lang|ru|З}} via segments a b c d and g of a nine-segment display"},"caption2":{"wt":"[[Ze (Cyrillic)|Letter З (ze)]]"},"footer":{"wt":"Different segments for similar glyphs"}},"i":0}}]}'> Digit 3 span lang=\"ru\" id=\"mwA2s\">З /span> /span> link rel=\"mw:PageProp/Category\" href=\"./Category:Articles_containing_Russian-language_text\" id=\"mwA2w\"/> via segments a b c d and g of a nine-segment display","txt":"Letter З via segments a b c d and g of a nine-segment display"}]]}'> Letter З (ze) Different segments for similar glyphs The extra two bars were slanted forward, allowing for an appropriate-looking И , and to differentiate the numeral 3 from the letter З . The Sharp Compet calculator also uses a 9-segment display, allowing a small range of characters and symbols to be used. Nine-segment displays are used in many Timex digital watches , and some pagers , such as the Nixxo XPage, [ 30 ] the Arch BR502 pager, [ 31 ] and the Scope Geo N8T. [ 32 ] They are also used in some Epson Stylus printers, and Newport iSeries digital meters. [ 33 ] The display used in the iSeries is unique in that it has a vertical extra segment at top, and a fully backwards-leaning slant for the extra segment at bottom. This allows for a somewhat more natural-appearing R and M. Pinball tables produced by Bally from 1986 to 1989 used nine-segment scoring displays. [ 34 ] A nine-segment display has been developed for displaying Bengali [ 35 ] and Roman numerals . [ citation needed ] Nine-segment vacuum fluorescent display Postal code nine-segment sample on an envelope Postcard from Latvia just before its independence Fourteen-segment display [ edit ] The individual segments of a fourteen-segment display A fourteen-segment display ( FSD ), also known as a starburst display or Union Jack display , [ 36 ] [ 37 ] is a type of display based on 14 segments that can be turned on or off to produce letters and numerals. It is an expansion of the more common seven-segment display , having an additional four diagonal and two vertical segments with the middle horizontal segment broken in half. A seven-segment display suffices for numerals and certain letters, but unambiguously rendering the ISO basic Latin alphabet requires more detail. [ 38 ] A slight variation is the sixteen-segment display which allows additional legibility in displaying letters or other symbols. A decimal point or comma may be present as an additional segment, or pair of segments; the comma (used for triple-digit groupings or as a decimal separator in many regions) is commonly formed by combining the decimal point with a closely 'attached' leftwards-descending arc-shaped segment. Electronic alphanumeric displays may use LEDs , LCDs , or vacuum fluorescent display devices. The LED variant is typically manufactured in single or dual character packages, allowing the system designer to choose the number of characters suiting the application. Often a character generator is used to translate 7-bit ASCII character codes to the 14 bits that indicate which of the 14 segments to turn on or off. [ 39 ] Character encoding [ edit ] Arabic numerals on a 14-segment display By lighting different elements, different characters can be displayed. In a 14-segment display, there is also an optional 15th segment which is a decimal point (denoted as "DP"). Decimal [ edit ] Hexadecimal encoding of decimal numbers for 14-segment display Digit 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 Hex code 0xC3F 0x406 0xDB 0x8F 0xE6 0xED 0xFD 0x1401 0xFF 0xE7 Latin alphabet [ edit ] Latin letters on a 14 segment display A 14-segment display is mostly used to display text because the 14 elements allow all Latin letters to be displayed both in upper case and lower case (with a few exceptions like "s"). [ citation needed ] Hexadecimal Encoding of Latin Alphabet for 14-segment display Alphabet A B C D E F G H I J K L M N Hex code 0xF7 0x128F 0x39 0x120F 0xF9 0xF1 0xBD 0xF6 0x1209 0x1E 0x2470 0x38 0x536 0x2136 Alphabet O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Hex code 0x3F 0xF3 0x203F 0x20F3 0x18D 0x1201 0x3E 0xC30 0x2836 0x2D00 0x1500 0xC09 Applications [ edit ] Most of the ASCII characters (the double quote is missing) on a 14-segment display Multiple-segment display devices use fewer elements than a full dot-matrix display, and may produce a better character appearance where the segments are shaped appropriately. This can reduce power consumption and the number of driver components. Fourteen-segment gas-plasma displays were used in pinball machines from 1986 through 1991 with an additional comma and period part making for a total of 16 segments. Fourteen and sixteen-segment displays were