Identity (philosophy) - Wikipedia Jump to content From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Relation each thing bears to itself alone For other uses of "Identity", see Identity (disambiguation) . In metaphysics , identity (from Latin: identitas , " sameness ") is the relation each thing bears only to itself. [ 1 ] [ 2 ] The notion of identity gives rise to many philosophical problems , including the identity of indiscernibles (if x and y share all their properties, are they one and the same thing?), and questions about change and personal identity over time (what has to be the case for a person x at one time and a person y at a later time to be one and the same person?). It is important to distinguish between qualitative identity and numerical identity . For example, consider two children with identical bicycles engaged in a race while their mother is watching. The two children have the same bicycle in one sense ( qualitative identity ) and the same mother in another sense ( numerical identity ). [ 3 ] This article is mainly concerned with numerical identity , which is the stricter notion. The philosophical concept of identity is distinct from the better-known notion of identity in use in psychology and the social sciences . The philosophical concept concerns a relation , specifically, a relation that x and y stand in if, and only if they are one and the same thing, or identical to each other (i.e. if, and only if x = y ). The sociological notion of identity , by contrast, has to do with a person's self-conception, social presentation, and more generally, the aspects of a person that make them unique, or qualitatively different from others (e.g. cultural identity , gender identity , national identity , online identity , and processes of identity formation ). Recently, identity has been conceptualized in relation to humans’ position within the ecological web of life; this combination of sociocultural and ecological identification is known as ecocultural identity. [ 4 ] Metaphysics of identity [ edit ] This section needs more citations . Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed . ( July 2012 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Metaphysicians and philosophers of language and mind ask other questions: What does it mean for an object to be the same as itself? If x and y are identical (are the same thing), must they always be identical? Are they necessarily identical ? What does it mean for an object to be the same, if it changes over time? (Is apple t the same as apple t +1 ?) If an object's parts are entirely replaced over time, as in the Ship of Theseus example, in what way is it the same? The law of identity used to be referred to as a " law of thought ". The modern formulation of identity is that of Gottfried Leibniz , who held that x is the same as y if and only if every predicate true of x is true of y as well. Leibniz's ideas have taken root in the philosophy of mathematics , where they have influenced the development of the predicate calculus as Leibniz's law . Mathematicians sometimes distinguish identity from equality . More mundanely, an identity in mathematics may be an equation that holds true for all values of a variable . Hegel argued that things are inherently self-contradictory [ 5 ] [ 6 ] and that the notion of something being self-identical only made sense if it were not also not-identical or different from itself and did not also imply the latter. In Hegel 's words, "Identity is the identity of identity and non-identity." More recent metaphysicians have discussed trans-world identity —the notion that there can be the same object in different possible worlds . [ 7 ] An alternative to trans-world identity is the counterpart relation in counterpart theory . It is a similarity relation that rejects trans-world individuals and instead defends an object's counterpart — the most similar object. Some philosophers have denied that there is such a relation as identity. Thus Ludwig Wittgenstein writes ( Tractatus 5.5301): "That identity is not a relation between objects is obvious." At 5.5303 he elaborates: "Roughly speaking: to say of two things that they are identical is nonsense, and to say of one thing that it is identical with itself is to say nothing." Bertrand Russell had earlier voiced a worry that seems to be motivating Wittgenstein's point ( The Principles of Mathematics §64): "[I]dentity, an objector may urge, cannot be anything at all: two terms plainly are not identical, and one term cannot be, for what is it identical with?" Even before Russell, Gottlob Frege , at the beginning of " On Sense and Reference ," expressed a worry with regard to identity as a relation: "Equality gives rise to challenging questions which are not altogether easy to answer. Is it a relation?" More recently, C. J. F. Williams [ 8 ] has suggested that identity should be viewed as a second-order relation, rather than a relation between objects, and Kai Wehmeier [ 9 ] has argued that appealing to a binary relation that every object bears to itself, and to no others, is both logically unnecessary and metaphysically suspect. Identity statements [ edit ] Kind-terms, or sortals , [ 10 ] give a criterion of identity and non-identity among items of their kind. See also [ edit ] Counterpart theory Difference (philosophy) Exact similarity and identity Four-dimensionalism / perdurantism Open individualism Teletransportation paradox Type–token distinction Vertiginous question Nonidentity problem Notes [ edit ] ↑ Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy : "Identity" , First published Wed 15 Dec 2004; substantive revision Sun 1 Oct 2006. ↑ Audi, Robert (1999). "identity". The Cambridge Dictionary of Philosophy . Cambridge University Press. ↑ Sandkühler, Hans Jörg (2010). "Ontologie: 4 Aktuelle Debatten und Gesamtentwürfe". Enzyklopädie Philosophie (in German). Meiner. Archived from the original on 11 March 2021 . Retrieved 14 January 2021 . ↑ Milstein, T.; Castro-Sotomayor, J. (1 May 2020). Milstein, Tema; Castro-Sotomayor, José (eds.). Routledge Handbook of Ecocultural Identity . London: Routledge. doi : 10.4324/9781351068840 . ISBN 9781351068840 . S2CID 229580440 . ↑ Siemens, Reynold L. (1988). "Hegel and the Law of Identity" . The Review of Metaphysics . 42 (1): 103– 127. ISSN 0034-6632 . JSTOR 20128696 . ↑ Bole, Thomas J. (1987). "Contradiction in Hegel's "Science of Logic" " . The Review of Metaphysics . 40 (3): 515– 534. ISSN 0034-6632 . JSTOR 20128487 . ↑ Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy : "Transworld Identity" , First published Wed 15 Dec 2004; substantive revision Sun 1 Oct 2006. ↑ C.J.F. Williams, What is identity? , Oxford University Press 1989. [ page needed ] ↑ Kai F. Wehmeier, "How to live without identity—and why," Australasian Journal of Philosophy 90:4, 2012, pp. 761–777. ↑ Theodore Sider. "Recent work on identity over time" . Philosophical Books 41 (2000): 81–89. References [ edit ] Gallois, A. 1998: Occasions of identity . Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-823744-8 Google books Parfit, D. 1984: Reasons and persons . Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-824908-X Google books Robinson, D. 1985: Can amoebae divide without multiplying? Australasian journal of philosophy , 63 (3): 299–319. doi : 10.1080/00048408512341901 Sidelle, A. 2000: [Review of Gallois (1998)]. Philosophical review , 109 (3): 469–471. JSTOR Sider, T. 2001: [Review of Gallois (1998)]. British journal for the philosophy science , 52 (2): 401–405. doi : 10.1093/bjps/52.2.401 External links [ edit ] Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy: Identity , First published Wed 15 Dec 2004; substantive revision Sun 1 Oct 2006. Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy: Identity over time . First published Fri 18 March 2005. Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy: Personal identity . First published Tue 20 Aug 2002; substantive revision Tue 20 Feb 2007. Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy: Relative identity . First published Mon 22 April 2002. Fernando Andacht , Mariela Michel, A Semiotic Reflection on Selfinterpretation and Identity . v t e Metaphysics Theories Abstract object theory Action theory Anti-realism Determinism Dualism Mind–body dualism Enactivism Essentialism Existentialism Free will Idealism Libertarianism Liberty Materialism Meaning of life Monism Naturalism Nihilism Phenomenalism Physicalism Pluralism Realism Relativism Scientific realism Solipsism Spiritualism Subjectivism Substance theory Theory of forms Truthmaker theory Type theory Concepts Abstract object Anima mundi Category of being Causality Causal closure Cogito, ergo sum Concept Cosmos Embodied cognition Entity Essence Existence Experience Hypostatic abstraction Idea Identity Importance Information Data Insight Intelligence Intention Linguistic modality Matter Meaning Mental representation Mind Motion Nature Necessity Object Ontology Pattern Perception Physical object Principle Property Qualia Quality Reality Relation Self Soul Subject Substantial form Thought Time Truth Type–token distinction Universal Unobservable Value Metaphysicians Anscombe Aquinas Aristotle Armstrong Averroes Avicenna Baudrillard Bergson Berkeley Boethius Bolzano Carnap Collingwood Davidson Deleuze Descartes Dummett Al-Ghazali Hegel Heidegger Hume Kant Kierkegaard Al-Kindi Kripke Laozi Leibniz Lewis Locke Lotze Lucretius Malebranche Meinong Moore Mozi Newton Nietzsche Parfit Parmenides Peirce Plantinga Plato Plotinus Proclus Putnam Quine Reid Russell Ryle Sartre Schopenhauer Scotus Spinoza Strawson Suárez Whitehead Wittgenstein Wolff more ... Notable works Sophist (c. 350 BC) Timaeus (c. 350 BC) Nyāya Sūtras (c. 200 BC) De rerum natura (c. 80 BC) Metaphysics (c. 50) Enneads (c. 270) Daneshnameh-ye Alai and Al-Nijat (c. 1000) Meditations on First Philosophy (1641) Ethics (1677) A Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge (1710) Monadology (1714) Critique of Pure Reason (1781) Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics (1783) The Phenomenology of Spirit (1807) The World as Will and Representation (1818) Concluding Unscientific Postscript to Philosophical Fragments (1846) Being and Time (1927) Being and Nothingness (1943) Simulacra and Simulation (1981) Related topics Axiology Cosmology Epistemology Feminist metaphysics Interpretations of quantum mechanics Mereology Meta- Phenomenology Philosophy of mind Philosophy of psychology Philosophy of self Philosophy of space and time Teleology Category Philosophy portal v t e Philosophy of mind Philosophers G. E. M. Anscombe Aristotle Armstrong Thomas Aquinas J. L. Austin Alexander Bain George Berkeley Henri Bergson Ned Block Franz Brentano C. D. Broad Tyler Burge David Chalmers Patricia Churchland Paul Churchland Andy Clark Dharmakirti Donald Davidson Daniel Dennett René Descartes Fred Dretske Fodor Goldman Martin Heidegger David Hume Edmund Husserl William James Frank Cameron Jackson Immanuel Kant David Lewis (philosopher) John Locke Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz Maurice Merleau-Ponty Marvin Minsky Thomas Nagel Alva Noë Derek Parfit Plato Hilary Putnam Richard Rorty Gilbert Ryle John Searle Wilfrid Sellars Baruch Spinoza Alan Turing Michael Tye Vasubandhu Ludwig Wittgenstein Stephen Yablo Zhuangzi more... Theories Behaviorism Biological naturalism Dualism Eliminative materialism Emergent materialism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Interactionism Naïve realism Neurophenomenology Neutral monism New mysterianism Nondualism Occasionalism Panpsychism Parallelism Phenomenalism Phenomenology Physicalism Type physicalism Property dualism Representational Solipsism Substance dualism Concepts Abstract object Animal machine Chinese room Creativity Cognition Cognitive closure Concept Consciousness Hard problem of consciousness Hypostatic abstraction Idea Identity Intelligence Artificial Human Intentionality Introspection Intuition Language of thought Mental event Mental image Mental process Mental property Mental representation Mind Mind–body problem Pain Problem of other minds Propositional attitude Qualia Tabula rasa Understanding Zombie Related Metaphysics Philosophy of artificial intelligence / information / perception / self Category Philosophers category Project Task Force Authority control databases National Identity (Philosophical concept) /span>"}]]}'> United States Identité (philosophie) /span>"}]]}'> France Identité (philosophie) /span>"}]]}'> BnF data Spain Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Identity_(philosophy) oldid=1360787898 " Categories : Identity (philosophy) Concepts in logic Metaphysical properties Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from May 2020 Articles containing Latin-language text CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles needing additional references from July 2012 All articles needing additional references Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from September 2022 Search Search Identity (philosophy) 32 languages Add topic