Interpretations of quantum mechanics - Wikipedia Jump to content From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Area of physical and philosophical debate Part of a series of articles about Quantum mechanics i ℏ d d t | Ψ ⟩ = H ^ | Ψ ⟩ {\displaystyle i\hbar {\frac {d}{dt}}|\Psi \rangle ={\hat {H}}|\Psi \rangle } Schrödinger equation Introduction Glossary History Background Classical mechanics Old quantum theory Interference Fundamentals Bra–ket notation Complementarity Entanglement Energy level Hamiltonian Measurement Nonlocality Quantum number State Superposition Symmetry Tunnelling Uncertainty Wave function Collapse Experiments Bell's inequality Davisson – Germer Double-slit Elitzur – Vaidman Franck – Hertz Mach – Zehnder Delayed-choice quantum eraser Stern – Gerlach Rutherford Formulations Overview Heisenberg Interaction Matrix Phase-space Schrödinger Sum-over-histories (path integral) Equations Dirac Klein–Gordon Pauli Rydberg Schrödinger Interpretations Bayesian Consciousness causes collapse Consistent histories Copenhagen de Broglie–Bohm Ensemble Hidden-variable Many-worlds Objective-collapse Quantum logic Superdeterminism Relational Transactional Advanced topics Relativistic quantum mechanics Quantum field theory Quantum information science Quantum computing Quantum chaos Decoherence EPR paradox Density matrix Scattering theory Quantum statistical mechanics Quantum machine learning v t e An interpretation of quantum mechanics is an attempt to explain how the mathematical theory of quantum mechanics might correspond to experienced reality . Quantum mechanics has held up to rigorous and extremely precise tests in an extraordinarily broad range of experiments. However, there exist a number of contending schools of thought over their interpretation. These interpretations differ on such fundamental questions as whether quantum mechanics is deterministic or stochastic , local or nonlocal , which elements of quantum mechanics can be considered real, and what the nature of measurement is, among other matters. While some variation of the Copenhagen interpretation is commonly presented in textbooks, many other interpretations have been developed. Despite a century of debate and experiment, no consensus has been reached among physicists and philosophers of physics concerning which interpretation best "represents" reality. [ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] History [ edit ] "},"header_background":{"wt":"#CCCCFF"},"align":{"wt":"right"},"direction":{"wt":"horizontal"},"image1":{"wt":"Erwin Schrodinger2.jpg"},"caption1":{"wt":"[[Erwin Schrödinger]]"},"width1":{"wt":"150"},"image2":{"wt":"Max Born.jpg"},"caption2":{"wt":"[[Max Born]]"},"width2":{"wt":"147"},"image3":{"wt":"Niels Bohr.jpg"},"caption3":{"wt":"[[Niels Bohr]]"},"width3":{"wt":"135"}},"i":0}}]}'> Influential figures in the interpretation of quantum mechanics Erwin Schrödinger Max Born Niels Bohr The definition of quantum theorists' terms, such as wave function and matrix mechanics , progressed through many stages. For instance, Erwin Schrödinger originally viewed the electron's wave function as its charge density smeared across space, but Max Born reinterpreted the absolute square value of the wave function as the electron's probability density distributed across space; [ 4 ] : 24–33 the Born rule , as it is now called, matched experiment, whereas Schrödinger's charge density view did not. The views of several early pioneers of quantum mechanics, such as Niels Bohr and Werner Heisenberg , are often grouped together as the " Copenhagen interpretation ", though physicists and historians of physics have argued that this terminology obscures differences between the views so designated. [ 4 ] [ 5 ] Copenhagen-type ideas were never universally embraced, and challenges to a perceived Copenhagen orthodoxy gained increasing attention in the 1950s with the pilot-wave interpretation of David Bohm and the many-worlds interpretation of Hugh Everett III . [ 4 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] The physicist N. David Mermin once quipped, "New interpretations appear every year. None ever disappear." [ 8 ] (Mermin also coined the saying "Shut up and calculate" to describe many physicists' attitude to interpretations of quantum theory, a remark which is often misattributed to Richard Feynman . [ 9 ] ) As a rough guide to development of the mainstream view during the 1990s and 2000s, a "snapshot" of opinions was collected in a poll by Schlosshauer et al. at the "Quantum Physics and the Nature of Reality" conference of July 2011. [ 10 ] The authors reference a similarly informal poll carried out by Max Tegmark at the "Fundamental Problems in Quantum Theory" conference in August 1997. The main conclusion of the authors is that "the Copenhagen interpretation still reigns supreme", receiving the most votes in their poll (42%), besides the rise to mainstream notability of the many-worlds interpretations: "The Copenhagen interpretation still reigns supreme here, especially if we lump it together with intellectual offsprings such as information-based interpretations and the QBism interpretation. In Tegmark's poll, the Everett interpretation received 17% of the vote, which is similar to the number of votes (18%) in our poll." Some concepts originating from studies of interpretations have found more practical application in quantum information science . [ 11 ] [ 12 ] Interpretive challenges [ edit ] This section needs more citations . Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed . ( August 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Abstract, mathematical nature of quantum field theories : the mathematical structure of quantum mechanics is abstract and does not result in a single, clear interpretation of its quantities. Apparent indeterministic and irreversible processes: in classical field theory , a physical property at a given location in the field is readily derived. In most mathematical formulations of quantum mechanics, measurement (understood as an interaction with a given state) has a special role in the theory, as it is the sole process that can cause a nonunitary, irreversible evolution of the state. Role of the observer in determining outcomes. Copenhagen-type interpretations imply that the wavefunction is a calculational tool, and represents reality only immediately after a measurement performed by an observer. Everettian interpretations grant that all possible outcomes are real, and that measurement-type interactions cause a branching process in which each possibility is realised. [ 13 ] Classically unexpected correlations between remote objects: entangled quantum systems , as illustrated in the EPR paradox , obey statistics that seem to violate principles of local causality by action at a distance . [ 14 ] Complementarity of proffered descriptions: complementarity holds that no set of classical physical concepts can simultaneously refer to all properties of a quantum system. For instance, wave description A and particulate description B can each describe quantum system S , but not simultaneously. This implies the composition of physical properties of S does not obey the rules of classical propositional logic when using propositional connectives (see " Quantum logic "). Like contextuality, the "origin of complementarity lies in the non-commutativity of operators" that describe quantum objects. [ 15 ] Contextual behaviour of systems locally: Quantum contextuality demonstrates that classical intuitions, in which properties of a system hold definite values independent of the manner of their measurement, fail even for local systems. Also, physical principles such as Leibniz's Principle of the identity of indiscernibles no longer apply in the quantum domain, signaling that most classical intuitions may be incorrect about the quantum world. Role of time: time enters the formalism of quantum mechanics as an external parameter rather than as an observable ; by an argument due to Wolfgang Pauli , no self-adjoint time operator exists when the Hamiltonian is bounded below. [ 16 ] Statements such as "instantaneous collapse" therefore refer to this parameter in a chosen reference frame rather than to a measurable simultaneity; which distant events count as simultaneous with a collapse is frame-dependent. [ 17 ] Influential interpretations [ edit ] Copenhagen interpretation [ edit ] Main article: Copenhagen interpretation The Copenhagen interpretation is a collection of views about the meaning of quantum mechanics principally attributed to Niels Bohr and Werner Heisenberg . It is one of the oldest attitudes towards quantum mechanics, as features of it date to the development of quantum mechanics during 1925–1927, and it remains one of the most commonly taught. [ 18 ] [ 19 ] There is no definitive historical statement of what is the Copenhagen interpretation, and there were in particular fundamental disagreements between the views of Bohr and Heisenberg. [ 20 ] [ 21 ] For example, Heisenberg emphasized a sharp "cut" between the observer (or the instrument) and the system being observed, [ 22 ] : 133 while Bohr offered an interpretation that is independent of a subjective observer or measurement or collapse, which relies on an "irreversible" or effectively irreversible process that imparts the classical behavior of "observation" or "measurement". [ 23 ] [ 24 ] [ 25 ] [ 26 ] Features common to Copenhagen-type interpretations include the idea that quantum mechanics is intrinsically indeterministic, with probabilities calculated using the Born rule , and the principle of complementarity , which states certain pairs of complementary properties cannot all be observed or measured simultaneously. Moreover, properties only result from the act of "observing" or "measuring"; the theory avoids assuming definite values from unperformed experiments . Copenhagen-type interpretations hold that quantum descriptions are objective, in that they are independent of physicists' mental arbitrariness. [ 27 ] : 85–90 The statistical interpretation of wavefunctions due to Max Born differs sharply from Schrödinger's original intent, which was to have a theory with continuous time evolution and in which wavefunctions directly described physical reality. [ 4 ] : 24–33 [ 28 ] Many worlds [ edit ] Main article: Many-worlds interpretation This section does not cite any sources . Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed . Find sources: "Interpretations of quantum mechanics" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( August 2026 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The many-worlds interpretation is an interpretation of quantum mechanics in which a universal wavefunction obeys the same deterministic, reversible laws at all times; in particular there is no (indeterministic and irreversible ) wavefunction collapse associated with measurement. The phenomena associated with measurement are claimed to be explained by decoherence , which occurs when states interact with the environment. More precisely, the parts of the wavefunction describing observers become increasingly entangled with the parts of the wavefunction describing their experiments. Although all possible outcomes of experiments continue to lie in the wavefunction's support, the times at which they become correlated with observers effectively "split" the universe into mutually unobservable alternate histories . Quantum information theories [ edit ] Main article: Quantum information Quantum information approaches view the quantum state as a representation of information [ 29 ] [ 30 ] [ 31 ] [ 32 ] and measurement as the process of updating that information. These approaches are subdivided into two main categories [ 33 ] : The first category consists of information ontologies, exemplified by J. A. Wheeler's " it from bit " concept, which have been described as a revival of immaterialism . [ 33 ] The second category comprises epistemic interpretations which propose that quantum mechanics describes an observer's knowledge of the world rather than the world itself. Within these frameworks, wavefunction collapse (also known as the reduction of the state vector) is often interpreted as an observer acquiring information from a measurement rather than as an objective physical event. As summarised by James Hartle : The state is not an objective property of an individual system but is that information, obtained from a knowledge of how a system was prepared, which can be used for making predictions about future measurements. ...A quantum mechanical state being a summary of the observer's information about an individual physical system changes both by dynamical laws, and whenever the observer acquires new information about the system through the process of measurement. The existence of two laws for the evolution of the state vector ... becomes problematical only if it is believed that the state vector is an objective property of the system ... The "reduction of the wavepacket" does take place in the consciousness of the observer, not because of any unique physical process which takes place there, but only because the state is a construct of the observer and not an objective property of the physical system. [ 34 ] A program associated with these approaches is “quantum reconstruction” [ 35 ] which seeks to derive the formalism of quantum mechanics from such information-theoretic axioms. Relational quantum mechanics [ edit ] Main article: Relational quantum mechanics The essential idea behind relational quantum mechanics , following the precedent of special relativity , is that different observers may give different accounts of the same series of events: for example, to one observer at a given point in time, a system may be in a single, "collapsed" eigenstate , while to another observer at the same time, it may be in a superposition of two or more states. Consequently, if quantum mechanics is to be a complete theory, relational quantum mechanics argues that the notion of "state" describes not the observed system itself, but the relationship, or correlation, between the system and its observer(s). The state vector of conventional quantum mechanics becomes a description of the correlation of some degrees of freedom in the observer, with respect to the observed system. However, it is held by relational quantum mechanics that this applies to all physical objects, whether or not they are conscious or macroscopic. Any "measurement event" is seen simply as an ordinary physical interaction, an establishment of the sort of correlation discussed above. Thus the physical content of the theory has to do not with objects themselves, but the relations between them. [ 36 ] [ 37 ] QBism [ edit ] Main article: Quantum Bayesianism QBism (pronounced cube-ism), which originally stood for "quantum Bayesianism", is an interpretation of quantum mechanics that takes an agent's actions and experiences as the central concerns of the theory. This interpretation is distinguished by its use of a subjective Bayesian account of probabilities to understand the quantum mechanical Born rule as a normative addition to good decision-making. QBism draws from the fields of quantum information and Bayesian probability and aims to eliminate the interpretational conundrums that have beset quantum theory. QBism deals with common questions in the interpretation of quantum theory about the nature of wavefunction superposition , quantum measurement , and entanglement . [ 38 ] [ 39 ] According to QBism, many, but not all, aspects of the quantum formalism are subjective in nature. For example, in this interpretation, a quantum state is not an element of reality—instead it represents the degrees of belief an agent has about the possible outcomes of measurements. For this reason, some philosophers of science have deemed QBism a form of anti-realism . [ 40 ] [ 41 ] The originators of the interpretation disagree with this characterization, proposing instead that the theory more properly aligns with a kind of realism they call "participatory realism", wherein reality consists of more than can be captured by any putative third-person account of it. [ 42 ] [ 43 ] Consistent histories [ edit ] Main article: Consistent histories The consistent histories interpretation generalizes the conventional Copenhagen interpretation and attempts to provide a natural interpretation of quantum cosmology . The theory is based on a consistency criterion that allows the history of a system to be described so that the probabilities for each history obey the additive rules of classical probability. It is claimed to be consistent with the Schrödinger equation . According to this interpretation, the purpose of a quantum-mechanical theory is to predict the relative probabilities of various alternative histories (for example, of a particle). Ensemble interpretation [ edit ] Main article: Ensemble interpretation The ensemble interpretation , also called the statistical interpretation, can be viewed as a minimalist interpretation. That is, it claims to make the fewest assumptions associated with the standard mathematics. It takes the statistical interpretation of Born to the fullest extent. The interpretation states that the wave function does not apply to an individual system – for example, a single particle – but is an abstract statistical quantity that only applies to an ensemble (a vast multitude) of similarly prepared systems or particles. In the words of Einstein: The attempt to conceive the quantum-theoretical description as the complete description of the individual systems leads to unnatural theoretical interpretations, which become immediately unnecessary if one accepts the interpretation that the description refers to ensembles of systems and not to individual systems. — Einstein in Albert Einstein: Philosopher-Scientist , ed. P.A. Schilpp (Harper Row, New York) The most prominent current advocate of the ensemble interpretation is Leslie E. Ballentine, professor at Simon Fraser University , author of the text book Quantum Mechanics, A Modern Development . De Broglie–Bohm theory [ edit ] Main article: De Broglie–Bohm theory The de Broglie–Bohm theory of quantum mechanics (also known as the pilot wave theory ) is a theory by Louis de Broglie and extended later by David Bohm to include measurements. Particles, which always have positions, are guided by the wavefunction. The wavefunction evolves according to the Schrödinger wave equation , and the wavefunction never collapses. The theory takes place in a single spacetime, is non-local , and is deterministic. The simultaneous determination of a particle's position and velocity is subject to the usual uncertainty principle constraint. The theory is considered to be a hidden-variable theory , and by embracing non-locality it reproduces the quantum-mechanical violation of Bell's inequality . The measurement problem is resolved, since the particles have definite positions at all times. [ 44 ] Collapse is explained as phenomenological . [ 45 ] In quantum equilibrium the theory makes the same predictions as standard quantum mechanics, so that experiments do not distinguish it from indeterministic interpretations. [ 46 ] Transactional interpretation [ edit ] Main article: Transactional interpretation The transactional interpretation of quantum mechanics (TIQM) by John G. Cramer is an interpretation of quantum mechanics inspired by the Wheeler–Feynman absorber theory . [ 47 ] It describes the collapse of the wave function as resulting from a time-symmetric transaction between a possibility wave from the source to the receiver (the wave function) and a possibility wave from the receiver to source (the complex conjugate of the wave function). This interpretation of quantum mechanics is unique in that it not only views the wave function as a real entity, but the complex conjugate