Mathematical sciences - Wikipedia Jump to content From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Group of areas of study that are primarily mathematical The mathematical sciences are a group of areas of study that includes, in addition to mathematics , those academic disciplines that are primarily mathematical in nature but may not be universally considered subfields of mathematics proper. Statistics , for example, is mathematical in its methods but grew out of bureaucratic and scientific observations , [ 1 ] which merged with inverse probability and then grew through applications in some areas of physics , biometrics , and the social sciences to become its own separate, though closely allied, field. Theoretical astronomy , theoretical physics , theoretical and applied mechanics , continuum mechanics , mathematical chemistry , actuarial science , computer science , computational science , data science , operations research , quantitative biology , control theory , econometrics , geophysics and mathematical geosciences are likewise other fields often considered part of the mathematical sciences. Some institutions offer degrees in mathematical sciences (e.g. the United States Military Academy , Stanford University , and University of Khartoum ) or applied mathematical sciences (for example, the University of Rhode Island ). See also [ edit ] Exact sciences – Sciences that admit of absolute precision in their results Formal science – Study of abstract structures described by formal systems Relationship between mathematics and physics – Relationship between fields of study References [ edit ] ↑ Stigler, Stephen M. (1986). The History of Statistics: The Measurement of Uncertainty Before 1900 . Harvard University Press. pp. 225–226 . ISBN 0-67440341-X . External links [ edit ] Division of Mathematical Sciences at the National Science Foundation , including a list of disciplinary areas supported Faculty of Mathematical Sciences at University of Khartoum , offers academic degrees in Mathematics , Computer Sciences and Statistics Programs of the Mathematical Sciences Research Institute Research topics studied at the Isaac Newton Institute for Mathematical Sciences Mathematical Sciences in the U.S. FY 2016 Budget ; a report from the AAAS Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mathematical_sciences oldid=1335840317 " Category : Applied mathematics Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Search Search Mathematical sciences 8 languages Add topic