History of Argentina - Wikipedia Jump to content From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Part of a series on the History of Argentina Pre-Columbian Indigenous peoples in Argentina Inca Empire Colonial Argentina Governorate of New Andalusia (1534–1542) Governorate of the Río de la Plata (1549–1776) Calchaquí Wars Battle of Mbororé Siege of Colonia del Sacramento (1807) Spanish–Portuguese War (1735–1737) Royal Audiencia of Buenos Aires (1661–1671), (1759–1788) Guaraní War First Cevallos expedition Capture of Port Egmont Bourbon Reforms in Buenos Aires Viceroyalty of the Río de la Plata (1776–1814) Second Cevallos expedition War of the Oranges British invasions of the River Plate Chuquisaca Revolution Independence May Revolution Primera Junta War of Independence Assembly of the Year XIII Crossing of the Andes Congress of Tucumán United Provinces of the Río de la Plata Civil Wars Federal League Bernardino Rivadavia Confederation Juan Manuel de Rosas Guerra Grande (Great War) Anglo-French blockade of the Río de la Plata Battle of Caseros State of Buenos Aires Argentine Unification War Revolution of 1880 Rise of Argentine Republic 1853 Constitution British investment in Argentina Paraguayan War Conquest of the Desert Generation of '80 Revolution of the Park Great European immigration Argentine Antarctica South American dreadnought race Radical Phase (1916–30) Patagonia Rebelde Nacionalismo The Infamous Decade World War II 1943 Argentine Revolution San Juan earthquake Foundation of Peronism Peronist Era Juan Perón and Eva Perón General Confederation of Labour Five-Year Plans Railway nationalisation in Argentina 1949 Constitution reform Hope Bay incident Bombing of Plaza de Mayo Argentina in Cold War Revolución Libertadora Arturo Frondizi and José María Guido 1963 Argentine Navy revolt Arturo Umberto Illia Laguna del Desierto incident Operativo Cóndor Argentine Revolution Montoneros and ERP Return of Perón Ezeiza massacre Argentine Anticommunist Alliance Rodrigazo 1976 Argentine coup d'état National Reorganization Process Dirty War Operation Independence Operation Charly Operation Soberanía Falklands War ( Guerra de las Malvinas ) Return to democracy Raúl Alfonsín Trial of the Juntas Carapintadas uprisings 1989 hyperinflation Carlos Menem Israeli embassy and AMIA bombings 1994 Constitution reform Argentine great depression December 2001 riots Kirchnerism Javier Milei Topics Corruption Economy Etymology LGBT Jewish Argentines Military Nationality Postal Rail transport Folkloric music Science and technology See also Timeline Years in Argentina Argentina portal v t e The history of Argentina can be divided into four main parts: the pre-Columbian time or early history (up to the sixteenth century), the colonial period (1536–1809), the period of nation-building (1810–1880), and the history of modern Argentina (from around 1880). Prehistory in the present territory of Argentina began with the first human settlements on the southern tip of Patagonia around 13,000 years ago. Written history began with the arrival of Spanish chroniclers in the expedition of Juan Díaz de Solís in 1516 to the Río de la Plata , which marks the beginning of Spanish occupation of this region. In 1776, the Spanish Crown established the Viceroyalty of the Río de la Plata , an umbrella of territories from which, with the Revolution of May 1810 , began a process of gradual formation of several independent states, including one called the United Provinces of the Río de la Plata . With the declaration of independence on 9 July 1816, and the military defeat of the Spanish Empire in 1824, a federal state was formed in 1853–1861, known today as the Argentine Republic . Pre-Columbian era [ edit ] The Cave of the Hands in Santa Cruz The fortification of Pucará de Tilcara in Jujuy Province , part of the Inca Empire The area now known as Argentina was relatively sparsely populated until the period of European colonization. The earliest traces of human life are dated from the Paleolithic period, and there are further signs in the Mesolithic and Neolithic . [ 1 ] However, large areas of the interior and Piedmont were apparently depopulated during an extensive dry period between 4000 and 2000 B.C. [ 2 ] The Uruguayan archaeologist Raúl Campá Soler divided the indigenous peoples in Argentina into three main groups: basic hunters and food gatherers, without the development of pottery ; advanced gatherers and hunters; and basic farmers with pottery. [ 3 ] The first group could be found in the Pampas and Patagonia , and the second one included the Charrúa and Minuane and the Guaraní . In the late 15th century, the Native tribes of the Quebrada de Humahuaca were conquered by the Inca Empire , under Topa Inca Yupanqui , to secure the supply of metals such as silver, zinc, and copper. The Incan domination of the area lasted for about half a century and ended with the arrival of the Spanish in 1536. [ 4 ] Agriculture was practised in Pre-Hispanic Argentina as far south as southern Mendoza Province . [ 5 ] Agriculture was at times practised beyond this limit in nearby areas of Patagonia but populations reverted at times to non-agricultural lifestyles. [ 5 ] By the time of the Spanish arrival to the area (1550s) there is no record of agriculture being practised in northern Patagonia. [ 5 ] The extensive Patagonian grasslands and their associated abundance of guanaco game may have contributed to the indigenous populations of the region favouring a hunter-gatherer lifestyle. [ 5 ] Spanish colonial era (1516-1810) [ edit ] Viceroyalty of Rio de la Plata in 1777 See also: Viceroyalty of Peru , Government of the Río de la Plata , Viceroyalty of the Río de la Plata , and May Revolution Europeans first arrived in the region with the 1502 Portuguese voyage of Gonçalo Coelho and Amerigo Vespucci . Around 1512, João de Lisboa and Estevão de Fróis discovered the Rio de La Plata in present-day Argentina, exploring its estuary, contacting the Charrúa people, and bringing the first news of the "people of the mountains", the Inca empire , obtained from the local natives. They also traveled as far south as the Gulf of San Matias at 42ºS, on the northern shores of Patagonia. [ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] The Spanish, led by Juan Díaz de Solís , visited the territory which is now Argentina in 1516. In 1536 Pedro de Mendoza established a small settlement at the modern location of Buenos Aires , which was abandoned in 1541. [ 9 ] From the north Diego de Almagro departed the newly conquered Inca capital of Cusco in 1535 and entered present-day Argentina from Tupiza in early 1536. The expedition of Diego de Almagro left Argentina as it crossed the Andes to Copiapó Valley in Chile in March-April 1536. [ 10 ] After the (failed) "First Foundation of Buenos Aires", a second one was established in 1580 by Juan de Garay , preceded by Córdoba foundation in 1573 by Jerónimo Luis de Cabrera . Those regions were part of the Viceroyalty of Peru , whose capital was Lima, and settlers arrived from that city. Unlike the other regions of South America, the colonization of the Río de la Plata estuary was not influenced by any gold rush , since it lacked any precious metals to mine. [ 9 ] The natural ports on the Río de la Plata estuary could not be used because all shipments were meant to be made through the port of Callao near Lima , a condition that led to contraband becoming the normal means of commerce in cities such as Asunción , Buenos Aires , and Montevideo . [ 11 ] The Spanish raised the status of this region by establishing the Viceroyalty of the Río de la Plata in 1776. This viceroyalty consisted of today's Argentina, Uruguay , and Paraguay , as well as much of present-day Bolivia . Buenos Aires, now holding the customs of the new political subdivision, became a flourishing port, as the revenues from the Potosí , the increasing maritime activity in terms of goods rather than precious metals , the production of cattle for the export of leather and other products, and other political reasons, made it gradually become one of the most important commercial centers of the region. Despite the money and political power that flowed into Buenos Aires, only the members of the viceregal court enjoyed things the general population could not. Buenos Aires was still in its developing stages, lacking full university degrees, career options, textiles, and self-reliance. Even the wealthiest families had bare furnishings and lacked basic household items, as their only Spanish ships came to Buenos Aires and items like fine china would be broken once they arrived. [ 12 ] The viceroyalty was, however, short-lived due to lack of internal cohesion among its many regions and lack of Spanish support. Ships from Spain became scarce again after the Spanish defeat at the battle of Trafalgar , that gave the British maritime supremacy. The British tried to invade Buenos Aires and Montevideo in 1806 and 1807, but were defeated both times by Santiago de Liniers . Those victories, achieved without help from mainland Spain, boosted the confidence of the city. [ 13 ] The beginning of the Peninsular War in Spain and the capture of the Spanish king Ferdinand VII created great concern all around the viceroyalty. It was thought that, without a King, people in America should rule themselves. This idea led to multiple attempts to remove the local authorities at Chuquisaca , La Paz , Montevideo and Buenos Aires , all of which were short-lived. A new successful attempt, the May Revolution of 1810, took place when it was reported that all of Spain, with the exception of Cádiz and León, had been conquered. War of Independence (1810-18) [ edit ] Main article: Argentine War of Independence See also: Primera Junta , Junta Grande , First Triumvirate (Argentina) , and Second Triumvirate (Argentina) Portrait of José de San Martín The May Revolution ousted the viceroy. Other forms of government, such as a constitutional monarchy or a Regency were briefly considered. The viceroyalty was also renamed, and it nominally became the United Provinces of the Río de la Plata . However, the status of the different territories that had belonged to the viceroyalty changed many times during the course of the war, as some regions would remain loyal to their previous governors and others were captured or recaptured; later these would split into several countries. The first military campaigns against the royalists were waged by Manuel Belgrano and Juan José Castelli . The Primera Junta , after expanding to become the Junta Grande , was replaced by the First Triumvirate . A Second Triumvirate would replace it years later, calling for the Assembly of year XIII that was meant to declare independence and write a constitution . However, it did not do either, and replaced the triumvirates with a single head of state office, the Supreme Director . By this time José de San Martín arrived in Buenos Aires with other generals of the Peninsular War . They gave new strength to the Revolutionary war, which was marked by the defeat of Belgrano and Castelli and the royalist resistance at the Banda Oriental. Alvear took Montevideo, and San Martín started a military campaign that would span an important part of the Spanish territories in America. He created the Army of the Andes in Mendoza and, with the help of Bernardo O'Higgins and other Chileans, he made the Crossing of the Andes and liberated Chile. With the Chilean navy at his disposal, he moved to Peru, liberating that country as well. San Martín met Simón Bolívar at Guayaquil , and retired from action. A new assembly, the Congress of Tucumán , was called while San Martín was preparing the crossing of the Andes. It finally declared independence from Spain or any other foreign power. Bolivia declared itself independent in 1825, and Uruguay was created in 1828 as a result of the Cisplatine War . The French-Argentine Hippolyte Bouchard then brought his fleet to wage war against Spain overseas and attacked Spanish California, Spanish Chile, Spanish Peru and Spanish Philippines. He secured the allegiance of escaped Filipinos in San Blas who defected from the Spanish to join the Argentine navy, due to common Argentine and Philippine grievances against Spanish colonization. [ 14 ] [ 15 ] At a later date, the Argentine Sun of May was adopted as a symbol by the Filipinos in the Philippine Revolution against Spain. Bouchard also secured the diplomatic recognition of Argentina from King Kamehameha I of the Kingdom of Hawaii . Historian Pacho O'Donnell affirms that Hawaii was the first state that recognized Argentina's independence. [ 16 ] During the Argentine War of independence, Juan Fermín de San Martín , brother of Jose de San Martin, was already in the Philippines and drumming up revolutionary fervor. [ 17 ] The United Kingdom officially recognized Argentine independence in 1825, with the signing of a Treaty of Friendship, Commerce, and Navigation on 2 February; the British chargé d'affaires in Buenos Aires, Woodbine Parish , signed on behalf of his country. Spanish recognition of Argentine independence was not to come for several decades. Historical map [ edit ] The map below is based on a wide range of antique maps for the periods shown and is intended to give a broad idea of the changes in the State of Argentina in the nineteenth century. The periods are broad and plus or minus about a decade around each date. The hatched areas are disputed or subject to change during the period, the text in this article will explain these changes. There are minor changes of territory that are not shown on the map. The changing state of Argentina. The light green area was allocated to indigenous peoples, the light pink area was the Liga Federal , the hatched areas are subject to change during the period. Argentine Civil Wars [ edit ] Main articles: Argentine Civil War and Argentine Confederation Governor Juan Manuel de Rosas by Cayetano Descalzi around 1841 The defeat of the Spanish was followed by a long civil war between unitarians and federalists , about the organization of the country and the role of Buenos Aires in it. Unitarians thought that Buenos Aires should lead the less-developed provinces, as the head of a strong centralized government . Federalists thought instead that the country should be a federation of autonomous provinces, like the United States. During this period, the government would kidnap protestors, and torture them for information. During this period, the United Provinces of the Rio de la Plata lacked a head of state, since the unitarian defeat at the Battle of Cepeda had ended the authority of the Supreme Directors and the 1819 Constitution . There was a new attempt in 1826 to write a constitution. The Argentine executive which had originated with a Junta in 1810 during the War of Independence and which had given way to a Triumvirate in 1813 and a Directory in 1819 finally was transferred to a president in 1824 with Bernardino Rivadavia as the inaugural holder of the office. [ 18 ] Rivadavia resigned due to the poor management at the Cisplatine War , and the 1826 constitution was repealed. During this time, the Governors of Buenos Aires Province received the power to manage the international relations of the confederation, including war and debt payment. The dominant figure of this period was the federalist Juan Manuel de Rosas , who is portrayed from different angles by the diverse historiographic flows in Argentina: liberal history usually considers him a dictator, while revisionists support him on the grounds of his defense of national sovereignty. [ 19 ] He ruled the province of Buenos Aires from 1829 to 1852, facing military threats from secession attempts, neighboring countries, and even European nations. Although Rosas was a Federalist, he kept the customs receipts of Buenos Aires under the exclusive control of the city, whereas the other provinces expected to have a part of the revenue. Rosas considered this a fair measure because only Buenos Aires was paying the external debt generated by the Baring Brothers loan to Rivadavia, the war of independence and the war against Brazil. He developed a paramilitary force of his own, the Popular Restorer Society , commonly known as " Mazorca " ("Corncob"). Rosas' reluctance to call for a new assembly to write a constitution led General Justo José de Urquiza from Entre Ríos to turn against him. Urquiza defeated Rosas during the battle of Caseros and called for such an assembly. The Argentine Constitution of 1853 is, with amendments, still in force to this day. The Constitution was not immediately accepted by Buenos Aires, which seceded from the Confederation; it rejoined a few years later. In 1862 Bartolomé Mitre became the first president of the unified country. Liberal governments (1862–1880) [ edit ] See also: Argentine Constitution of 1853 , Conquest of the Desert , Generation of '80 , and South American dreadnought race President Domingo Faustino Sarmiento The presidency of Bartolomé Mitre saw an economic improvement in Argentina, with agricultural modernization, foreign investment, new railroads and ports and a wave of immigration from Europe . Mitre also stabilized the political system by commanding federal interventions that defeated the personal armies of caudillos Chacho Peñaloza and Juan Sáa . Argentina joined Uruguay and Brazil against Paraguay in the War of the Triple Alliance , which ended during Sarmiento's rule with the defeat of Paraguay and the annexation of part of its territory by Argentina. Despite victory in the war, Mitre's popularity declined severely because a broad section of the Argentine population was opposed to the war due to the alliance with Brazil (Argentina's historic rival) that took place during the war, and the betrayal of Paraguay (which had been until then one of the country's most important economic allies). One of the major hallmarks of Mitre's presidency was the "Law of Compromise", in which Buenos Aires joined the Argentine Republic and allowed the government to use the City of Buenos Aires as the center of government, but without federalizing the city and by reserving the right of the province of Buenos Aires to secede from the nation if conflict arose. In 1868 Mitre was succeeded by Domingo Faustino Sarmiento , who promoted public education, culture, telegraphs ; as well as the modernization of the Army and the Navy . Sarmiento managed to defeat the last known caudillos and also dealt with the fallout of the Triple Alliance War, which included a decrease in national production due to the death of thousands of soldiers and an outbreak of diseases, such as cholera and yellow fever , brought by returning soldiers. In 1874 Nicolás Avellaneda became president and ran into trouble when he had to deal with the economic depression left by the Panic of 1873 . Most of these economic issues were solved when new land was opened for development after the expansion of national territory through the Conquest of the Desert , led by his war minister Julio Argentino Roca . This military campaign took most of the territories under the control of natives, and reduced their population. In 1880 a trade conflict caused turmoil in Buenos Aires, which led governor Carlos Tejedor to declare secession from the republic. Avellaneda denied them this right, breaking the Law of Compromise, and proceeded to send army troops led by Roca to take over the province. Tejedor's secession efforts were defeated and Buenos Aires joined the republic definitively, federalizing the city of Buenos Aires and handing it over to the government as the nation's capital city. Conservative Republic (1880–1916) [ edit ] See also: Argentine–Chilean naval arms race and South American dreadnought race President Julio Argentino Roca , the central political figure of the PAN Hegemony years After his surge in popularity due to his successful desert campaign, Julio Roca was elected president in 1880 as the can