History of South Africa - Wikipedia Jump to content From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards . The specific problem is: Declining overall quality, especially the lead section. Please help improve this article if you can. ( June 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on the History of South Africa Early history Middle Stone Age Late Stone Age Bantu expansion Kingdom of Mapungubwe Kaditshwene Venda kingdom Lobedu queendom Dutch colonisation Dutch Cape Colony Mfecane Ndwandwe Paramountcy Mthethwa Paramountcy Zulu Kingdom British colonisation Cape Colony Colony of Natal Transvaal Colony Orange River Colony Boer Republics South African Republic Orange Free State Natalia Republic Boer Wars First Boer War Jameson Raid Second Boer War Pre-Apartheid Union of South Africa World War I World War II Apartheid era Apartheid Legislation South African Border War Angolan Civil War Bantustans Internal resistance Apartheid referendum Post-apartheid Mandela presidency Mbeki presidency Motlanthe presidency Zuma presidency Ramaphosa presidency Topic Economic history Inventions and discoveries LGBT history Military history Political history Religious history Slavery Timeline List of years in South Africa South Africa portal v t e The first modern humans are believed to have lived in South Africa more than 100,000 years ago. [ 1 ] [ 2 ] They were collectively known as the Khoisan , the Khoekhoe , and the San . Starting in about 400 AD, Bantu ethnic groups from Western and Central Africa joined these groups. The Bantu tribes were mainly limited to the area north of the Soutpansberg and the northeastern part of South Africa until the later Middle Iron Age (1000-1300), after which they started migrating south into the interior of the country. European exploration of the African coast began in the late 14th century when Portugal sought an alternative route to the Silk Road to China. During this time, Portuguese explorers traveled down the west African Coast, detailing and mapping the coastline and in 1488 they rounded the Cape of Good Hope . [ 3 ] The Dutch East India Company established a trading post in Cape Town under the command of Jan van Riebeeck in April 1652. [ 4 ] The mostly Dutch workers who settled at the Cape became known as the Free Burghers and gradually established farms in the Dutch Cape Colony . [ 5 ] Following the Invasion of the Cape Colony by the British in 1795 and 1806, mass migrations collectively known as the Great Trek occurred during which the Voortrekkers established several Boer Republics in the interior of South Africa. [ 6 ] The discoveries of diamonds and gold in the nineteenth century had a profound effect on the fortunes of the region, propelling it onto the world stage and introducing a shift away from an exclusively agrarian-based economy towards industrialisation and the development of urban infrastructure. The discoveries also led to new conflicts, culminating in open warfare between the Boer settlers and the British Empire , the two sides fighting for control over the nascent mining industry. [ 7 ] Following the defeat of the Boers in the Second Anglo–Boer War or South African War (1899–1902), the Union of South Africa was created as a self-governing dominion of the British Empire on 31 May 1910 in terms of the South Africa Act 1909 , which amalgamated the four previously separate British colonies: Cape Colony , Colony of Natal , Transvaal Colony , and Orange River Colony . The country became a fully sovereign nation state within the British Empire in 1934 following enactment of the Status of the Union Act . The monarchy came to an end on 31 May 1961, replaced by a republic as the consequence of a 1960 referendum . From 1948–1994, South African politics was dominated by Afrikaner nationalism . A comprehensive system of racial segregation and white minority rule known as apartheid was introduced in 1948. On 2 February 1990, F. W. de Klerk , then state president of South Africa and leader of the National Party (NP), unbanned the African National Congress (ANC) and freed Nelson Mandela from life imprisonment in Victor Verster Prison (now called Drakenstein Correctional Centre ). The CODESA talks negotiated the creation of a new non-racial democratic South Africa, for which de Klerk and Mandela were later awarded the Nobel Peace Prize . These negotiations led to the creation of a democratic constitution for all South Africa. On 27 April 1994, after decades of ANC-led resistance to white minority rule and international opposition to apartheid, the ANC achieved a majority in the country's first democratic election. Since then, despite a continually decreasing electoral majority, [ 8 ] the ANC has ruled South Africa. In 2024 , the ANC lost its parliamentary majority for the first time since the transition to democracy. High rates of crime , corruption , unemployment, low economic growth, an ongoing energy crisis and poorly maintained infrastructure are some of the problems challenging contemporary South Africa. Early history (before 1652) [ edit ] Main article: Early history of South Africa Prehistory [ edit ] Further information: People of Africa Scientists researching the periods before written historical records were made have established that the territory of what is now referred to generically as South Africa was one of the important centres of human evolution . It was inhabited by Australopithecines since at least 2.5 million years ago. Modern human settlement occurred around 125,000 years ago in the Middle Stone Age, as shown by archaeological discoveries at Klasies River Caves . [ 9 ] The first human habitation is associated with a DNA group originating in a northwestern area of southern Africa and still prevalent in the indigenous Khoisan ( Khoi and San ). Southern Africa was later populated by Bantu-speaking people who migrated from the western region of central Africa during the early centuries AD. Professor Raymond Dart discovered the skull of a 2.51 million year old Taung Child in 1924, the first example of Australopithecus africanus ever found. Following in Dart's footsteps Robert Broom discovered a new much more robust hominid in 1938 Paranthropus robustus at Kromdraai , and in 1947 uncovered several more examples of Australopithecus africanus at Sterkfontein . At the Blombos cave in 2002, stones were discovered engraved with grid or cross-hatch patterns, dated to some 70,000 years ago. This has been interpreted as the earliest example ever discovered of abstract art or symbolic art created by Homo sapiens . [ 10 ] Many more species of early hominid have come to light in recent decades. The oldest is Little Foot , a collection of footbones of an unknown hominid between 2.2 and 3.3 million years old, discovered at Sterkfontein by Ronald J. Clarke . An important recent find was that of 1.9 million year old Australopithecus sediba , discovered in 2008. In 2015, the discovery near Johannesburg of a previously unknown species of Homo was announced, named Homo naledi . It has been described as one of the most important paleontological discoveries in modern times. [ 11 ] San and Khoikhoi [ edit ] The descendants of the Middle Paleolithic populations are thought to be the aboriginal San and Khoikhoi tribes. These are collectively known as the Khoisan , a modern European portmanteau of these two tribes' names. The settlement of southern Africa by the Khoisan corresponds to the earliest separation of the extant Homo sapiens populations altogether, associated in genetic science with what is described in scientific terms as matrilinear haplogroup L0 (mtDNA) and patrilinear haplogroup A (Y-DNA), originating in a northwestern area of southern Africa. [ 12 ] [ 13 ] [ 14 ] The San and Khoikhoi are essentially distinguished only by their respective occupations. Whereas the San were hunter-gatherers, the Khoikhoi were pastoral herders. [ 15 ] [ 16 ] [ 17 ] The initial origin of the Khoikhoi remains uncertain. [ 18 ] [ 19 ] Archaeological discoveries of livestock bones on the Cape Peninsula indicate that the Khoikhoi began to settle there by about 2000 years ago. [ 20 ] In the late 15th and early 16th centuries, Portuguese mariners, who were the first Europeans at the Cape, encountered pastoral Khoikhoi with livestock.
Later, English and Dutch seafarers in the late 16th and 17th centuries exchanged metals for cattle and sheep with the Khoikhoi.
The conventional view is that availability of livestock was one reason why, in the mid-17th century, the Dutch East India Company established a staging post where the port city of Cape Town is today situated. The establishment of the staging post by the Dutch East India Company at the Cape in 1652 soon brought the Khoikhoi into conflict with Dutch settlers over land ownership. Competition between Dutch and Khoikhoi pastoralists over grazing land led to livestock theft and conflict. [ 21 ] The Khoikhoi were ultimately expelled from the peninsula by force, after a succession of wars. The first Khoikhoi–Dutch War broke out in 1659, the second in 1673, and the third 1674–1677. [ 22 ] By the time of their defeat and expulsion from the Cape Peninsula and surrounding districts, the Khoikhoi population was decimated by a smallpox epidemic introduced by Dutch sailors against which the Khoikhoi had no natural resistance or indigenous medicines. [ 23 ] The Bantu people [ edit ] Main article: Bantu peoples of South Africa Looking out over the floodplains of the Luvuvhu River (right) and the Limpopo River (far distance and left) The Bantu expansion was one of the major demographic movements in human prehistory, sweeping much of the African continent during the 2nd and 1st millennia BC. [ 24 ] Bantu-speaking communities reached southern Africa from the Congo Basin as early as the 4th century BC. [ 25 ] Some groups, ancestral to today's Nguni peoples (the Zulu , Xhosa , Swazi , and Ndebele ), preferred to live near the eastern coast of what is present-day South Africa. [ 26 ] Others, now known as the Sotho–Tswana peoples ( Tswana , Pedi , and Sotho ), settled in the interior on the plateau known as the Highveld , [ 26 ] while today's Venda and Tsonga peoples made their homes in the north-eastern areas of present-day South Africa. The Kingdom of Mapungubwe , which was located near the northern border of present-day South Africa, at the confluence of the Limpopo and Shashe rivers adjacent to present-day Zimbabwe and Botswana , was the first indigenous kingdom in southern Africa between AD 900 and 1300. It developed into the largest kingdom in the sub-continent before it was abandoned because of climatic changes in the 14th century. Smiths created objects of iron, copper and gold both for local decorative use and for foreign trade. The kingdom controlled trade through the east African ports to Arabia , India and China , and throughout southern Africa, making it wealthy through the exchange of gold and ivory for imports such as Chinese porcelain and Persian glass beads. [ 27 ] Specifics of the contact between Bantu-speakers and the indigenous Khoisan ethnic group remain largely unresearched, although linguistic proof of assimilation exists, as several southern Bantu languages (notably Xhosa and Zulu ) are theorised in that they incorporate many click consonants from the Khoisan languages , as possibilities of such developing independently are valid as well. Colonization [ edit ] Portuguese role [ edit ] See also: Portugal in the Age of Discovery , Discovery of the sea route to India , Bartolomeu Dias , Vasco da Gama , and Portuguese Empire Statue of Bartolomeu Dias at the High Commission of South Africa in London. He was the first European navigator to sail around the southernmost tip of Africa. The Portuguese mariner Bartolomeu Dias was the first European to explore the coastline of South Africa in 1488, while attempting to discover a trade route to the Far East via the southernmost cape of South Africa, which he named Cabo das Tormentas , meaning Cape of Storms . In November 1497, a fleet of Portuguese ships under the command of the Portuguese mariner Vasco da Gama rounded the Cape of Good Hope. By 16 December, the fleet had passed the Great Fish River on the east coast of South Africa, where Dias had earlier turned back. Da Gama gave the name Natal to the coast he was passing, which in Portuguese means Christmas. Da Gama's fleet proceeded northwards to Zanzibar and later sailed eastwards, eventually reaching India and opening the Cape Route between Europe and Asia. [ 28 ] Many Portuguese words are still found along the coast of South Africa including Saldanha, Algoa, Natal, Agulhas, Benguela and Lucia. Dutch role [ edit ] [ /span>icon span typeof=\"mw:Entity\" id=\"mwASA\">] /span>","txt":"[icon]"}]]}'> This section needs expansion . You can help by adding missing information . ( May 2017 ) See also: Dutch Republic in the Age of Discovery , Maritime history of the Dutch East India Company , Dutch East India Company (VOC) , First Dutch Expedition to Indonesia , Second Dutch Expedition to Indonesia , Brouwer Route , and Jan Huyghen van Linschoten Replica of an East Indiaman of the Dutch East India Company / United East Indies Company (VOC). The Dutch East India Company was a major force behind the Golden Age of Dutch exploration (c. 1590s–1720s) and Netherlandish cartography (c. 1570s–1670s). Dutch colonisation (1652–1815) [ edit ] [ /span>icon span typeof=\"mw:Entity\" id=\"mwAS8\">] /span>","txt":"[icon]"}]]}'> This section needs expansion . You can help by adding missing information . ( May 2017 ) Main article: Dutch Cape Colony See also: History of South Africa (1652–1815) , Economic history of South Africa , Military history of South Africa , Khoikhoi–Dutch Wars , Dutch Empire , Maritime history of the Dutch East India Company , Military history of the Dutch East India Company , and Dutch Republic in the Age of Discovery See also: History of Cape Town , Stellenbosch , Swellendam , Graaff-Reinet , Franschhoek , Huguenots in South Africa , Cape Dutch , Dorsland Trek , Afrikaner nationalism , Christianity in South Africa , Afrikaner Calvinism , Dutch Reformed Church in South Africa , Cape Dutch architecture , Roman-Dutch law , and South African wine View of Table Bay with ships of the Dutch East India Company (VOC), c. 1683. Jan van Riebeeck , first Commander of the Dutch East India Company colony Groot Constantia , the oldest wine estate in South Africa, was founded in 1685 by Simon van der Stel . The South African wine industry (New World wine) is among the lasting legacy of the VOC era . The recorded economic history of South Africa began with the VOC period. The Dutch East India Company (in the Dutch of the day: Vereenigde Oostindische Compagnie , or VOC) decided to establish a permanent settlement at the Cape in 1652. The VOC, one of the major European trading houses sailing the spice route to the East, had no intention of colonizing the area, instead wanting only to establish a secure base camp where passing ships could be serviced and restock on supplies. [ 26 ] To this end, a small VOC expedition under the command of Jan van Riebeeck reached Table Bay on 6 April 1652. [ 29 ] The VOC had settled at the Cape in order to supply their trading ships. The Cape and the VOC had to import Dutch farmers to establish farms to supply the passing ships as well as to supply the growing VOC settlement. The small initial group of free burghers, as these farmers were known, steadily increased in number and began to expand their farms further north and east into the territory of the Khoikhoi. [ 26 ] The free burghers were ex-VOC soldiers and gardeners, who were unable to return to Holland when their contracts were completed with the VOC. [ 30 ] The VOC also brought around 71,000 slaves to Cape Town from India, Indonesia, East Africa (including Mauritius), and Madagascar. [ 31 ] The statue of Jan van Riebeeck , the founder of Cape Town , in Heerengracht Street. The Castle of Good Hope ( Kasteel de Goede Hoop in Dutch), Cape Town. Founded officially in 1652, Kaapstad /Cape Town is the oldest urban area in South Africa. The majority of burghers had Dutch ancestry and belonged to the Dutch Reformed Church , but there were also some Germans, who often happened to be Lutherans . In 1688, the Dutch and the Germans were joined by French Huguenots , Calvinist Protestants fleeing religious persecution in France under its Catholic ruler, King Louis XIV . Van Riebeeck considered it impolitic to enslave the local Khoi and San aboriginals, so the VOC began to import large numbers of slaves, primarily from the Dutch colonies in Indonesia . Eventually, van Riebeeck and the VOC began to make indentured servants out of the Khoikhoi and the San. The descendants of unions between the Dutch settlers and the Khoi-San and Malay slaves became known officially as the Cape Coloureds and the Cape Malays , respectively. A significant number of the offspring from the white and slave unions were absorbed into the local proto- Afrikaans speaking white population. The racially mixed genealogical origins of many white South Africans have been traced to interracial unions at the Cape between the European occupying population and imported Asian and African slaves, the indigenous Khoi and San, and their mixed-ethnicity descendants. [ 32 ] Simon van der Stel , the first Governor of the Dutch settlement, famous for his development of the lucrative South African wine industry, was himself of mixed race-origin. [ 33 ] British colonisation, Mfecane and Boer Republics (1815–1910) [ edit ] British at the Cape [ edit ] Main articles: British Cape Colony and History of South Africa (1815–1910) The Rhodes Colossus — Cecil Rhodes spanning "Cape to Cairo" In 1787, shortly before the French Revolution , a faction within the politics of the Dutch Republic known as the Patriot Party attempted to overthrow the regime of stadtholder William V . Though the revolt was crushed, it was resurrected after the French invasion of the Netherlands in 1794/1795 which resulted in the stadtholder fleeing the country. The Patriot revolutionaries then proclaimed the Batavian Republic , which was closely allied to revolutionary France. In response, the stadtholder, who had taken up residence in England, issued the Kew Letters , ordering colonial governors to surrender to the British. The British then seized the Cape in 1795 to prevent it from falling into French hands. The Cape was relinquished back to the Dutch in 1803. [ 34 ] In 1805, the British inherited the Cape as a prize during the Napoleonic Wars , [ 26 ] again seizing the Cape from the French controlled Kingdom of Holland which had replaced the Batavian Republic. [ 35 ] Like the Dutch before them, the British initially had little interest in the Cape Colony, other than as a strategically located port. As one of their first tasks they outlawed the use of the Dutch language in 1806 with the view of converting the Dutch settlers to the British language and culture. [ 36 ] Under the 1806 Cape Articles of Capitulation the new British colonial rulers were required to respect previous legislation enacted under Roman-Dutch law , [ 37 ] and this led to a separation of the law in South Africa from English Common Law , [ citation needed ] the continuance of Roman-Dutch law [ 38 ] and a high degree of legislative autonomy. The governors and assemblies that governed the legal process in the various colonies of South Africa launched on an independent legislative path different from the rest of the British Empire. [ citation needed ] British sovereignty of the area was recognised at the Congress of Vienna in 1815, the Dutch accepting a payment of 6 million pounds [ 38 ] (equivalent to £31,2 billion in 2023) [ 39 ] for the colony. [ 38 ] This had the effect of forcing more of the Dutch colonists to move (or trek) away from Bri