Lincoln–Douglas debate format - Wikipedia Jump to content From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Form of American high school debate This article is about a type of American high school debate. For the historical debates, see Lincoln–Douglas debates . This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page . ( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs more citations . Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed . Find sources: "Lincoln–Douglas debate format" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( October 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article includes a list of general references but lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations . Please help improve this article by introducing more precise citations. ( May 2012 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article may contain original research . Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed. ( January 2026 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Lincoln-Douglas debate Tournaments Tournament of Champions (debate) National Speech and Debate Association (NSDA) National Catholic Forensic League Case Structure Value premise Value criterion Argumentative Concepts Offense - Defense - Turn - Drop Lincoln–Douglas debate (commonly abbreviated as LD Debate , or simply LD ) is a type of one-on-one competitive debate practiced mainly in the United States at the high school level. It is sometimes also called values debate because the format traditionally places a heavy emphasis on logic , ethical values , and philosophy . [ 1 ] The Lincoln–Douglas debate format is named for the 1858 Lincoln–Douglas debates between Abraham Lincoln and Stephen A. Douglas , because their debates focused on slavery and the morals, values, and logic behind it. [ 2 ] LD debates are used by the National Speech and Debate Association (NSDA) competitions, and also widely used in related debate leagues such as the National Christian Forensics and Communication Association , the National Catholic Forensic League , the National Educational Debate Association , the Texas University Interscholastic League , [ 3 ] Texas Forensic Association , [ 4 ] Stoa USA and their affiliated regional organizations. Teams in a debate competition are given a resolution (a statement). In the competition, one side (called the affirmative ) must support the resolution, and the other side (called the negative ) must show that the action does not conform to the principle or that the affirmative has not shown how it does so (there are different schools of thought as to the negative's burden). [ 5 ] The vast majority of tournaments use the resolutions distributed by the NSDA, which is changed once every two months. The debate format, akin to Policy debate , is known for spreading [ 6 ] , a practice in which debaters speak quickly to squeeze as much argument as possible into a short time limit. Format [ edit ] The following is the basic debate format. Each side has 4 minutes of preparation time they can distribute among the two prep time periods assigned to them. [ 7 ] Stage Time (minutes) Abbreviation Description Affirmative Constructive 6 AC (or 1AC) The Affirmative (always) reads a pre-written case, outlining why the resolution is valid. Cross Examination 3 CX The Negative asks the Affirmative questions, in order to expose logical flaws in the Affirmative's argument. Preparation time - Negative up to 4 (5 at some tournaments) prep time (down time) The Negative prepares the attack against the Affirmative's case. Negative Constructive (and first negative Rebuttal) 7 NC (1NR) The Negative (almost always) reads a pre-written case and (almost always) moves on to address the Affirmative case. Cross Examination 3 CX The Affirmative asks the Negative questions. Preparation Time - Affirmative up to 4(5 at some tournaments) prep time (down time) The Affirmative prepares the attack against the Negative's case. First Affirmative Rebuttal 4 1AR The Affirmative addresses both their opponent's case and their own. This speech is considered by many debaters to be the most difficult speech, as debaters must use 4 minutes to respond to a 7-minute speech, whereas the Negative has 6 minutes to respond to the 1AR of only 4 minutes. Preparation time - negative The balance of Negative's prep time prep time The Negative prepares the attack against the Affirmative's case. Negative Rebuttal 6 NR (or 2NR) The Negative addresses the arguments of the previous speech and summarizes the round for the judge. New arguments and evidence are typically frowned upon because the affirmative only has 3 minutes to respond to this speech. Preparation time - affirmative The balance of Affirmative's prep time prep time The Affirmative prepares the attack against the Negative's case. The Second Affirmative Rebuttal 3 2AR The Affirmative addresses the arguments of the previous speech and summarizes the round for the judge. No new arguments or evidence are allowed in the 2AR because the negative does not have another speech to answer these final arguments. Each debater gets thirteen minutes of total speaking time, and three minutes of question time. The rounds take approximately 45 minutes in total. Each debater receives four to five minutes of preparation time to use between speeches however they like. While the amount of prep time is at the tournament's discretion, the NSDA advocated three minutes until midway through the 2006–2007 season, when it decided on four. [ 2 ] Some tournaments, most notably the TOC, choose to give debaters 5 minutes. Some tournaments also allow the use of flex prep, which melds the cross-examination time and prep time together to create a 6-8 minute block that can be used for questions and/or prep. Asking cross-examination questions during prep time is generally accepted on the national circuit. Most speeches start with an order often called an "offtime roadmap" because it's given before the speech starts. The roadmap states which order the arguments and flows will be addressed in before the time starts (i.e. "The order will be Topicality, K, CP, DA, then case."). Traditional case structures [ edit ] Cases are logical syllogisms that attempt to prove the resolution morally obligatory (affirmative) or morally prohibited (negative). The typical (though not mandated) case is divided into a criterium , which outlines the conditions for discussing the resolution, and contentions , which are the arguments. The most essential part of the criterium is the value consideration , which is composed of a value (often called the value premise) that the case attempts to demonstrate the resolution action achieves/is in accordance with, and a value criterion . The value criterion is a way to attain, achieve and quantify the nebulous value. In most modern NSDA resolutions, a value is often stated in the resolution. For example, "Resolved: Just governments ought to ensure food security for citizens." Because Justice is used in the resolution, it is an appealing value for many debaters. Morals is a common value due to its inclusion in many resolutions, followed by justice , social welfare, or other values depending on the topic. The criterium also may contain definitions for purposes of clarity and/or excluding certain lines of argumentation, and preemptions/"spikes" that attempt to preclude certain arguments that one's opponent should not attempt. A narrow definition can be a spike. The contentions, of which a case must have at least one, links the resolution to the value. A proper contention necessarily has a claim, which summarizes the argument, at least one warrant, which is a reason the claim is true, and an impact, which explains the importance of the argument—or specifically why the argument meets the value criterium. In addition, contentions often include sub-points. [ 8 ] For example, a negative case for the resolution "Resolved: A just society ought not use the death penalty as a form of punishment" could have a value of justice, a value criterion of deterring crime, and then evidence-supported contentions that demonstrate that the death penalty uniquely fails as a deterrent. An affirmative case could have a value of justice, a criterion of respecting human life, and contentions giving evidence based arguments that all methods of execution are inhumane. The debaters would then argue whether crime deterrence or adherence to the principle of essentialist humanity is more effective at encouraging justice based on the evidence in their cases. [ 2 ] Progressive case structures [ edit ] Plans and Counterplans [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources . Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed . ( October 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Lincoln–Douglas debate format borrows from Policy format debate in order to create plans and counter-plans. A counterplan (also called a CP) allows the negative side to defend an advocacy separate from the status quo . A counterplan must: Compete with the affirmative's advocacy. The affirmative can disprove this quality of competition using a variety of "perms," short for permutation , which describes the possibility of some sort of combination or permutation of the affirmative's and the negative's advocacy. A few types of perms include perm-do-both (in which the affirmative attempts to prove that the counterplan and the plan are not mutually exclusive and can co-exist, which means the counterplan no longer disproves the affirmative), perm-do-the-counterplan (in which the affirmative attempts to prove that the counterplan is the plan, based on how the counterplan or the plan function), timeframe-perm (in which the affirmative attempts to prove that the counterplan can exist in a world after the plan), and textual-based perms (a variety of perms in which the affirmative claims a lack of competition via the specific text of the plan and counterplan). Offer a net-benefit to the affirmative. The affirmative can disprove that the counterplan offers a net-benefit by claiming that the plan solves for the net-benefit, that the counterplan does not, or that the net-benefit is not significant. Solve either the entirety of or a sufficient amount of the impacts that the affirmative's advocacy solves. If the counterplan does not do either, then the affirmative can simply claim that the counterplan is not as good as the plan. There are various ways that an affirmative could defeat a counterplan, usually described in the acronym "POST," which stands for "Permutations, Offense, Solvency deficits, and Theory." Solvency deficits and perms explained above, whereas offense refers to disadvantages against the counterplan and/or turns against the counterplan's internal/external net benefit. Theory refers to reasons why the counterplan is theoretically illegitimate. Common examples include arguments that plan-inclusive counterplans (PICs), international actor counterplans, and process counterplans are undesirable or illegitimate forms of counterplans that ought to be excluded. Kritiks [ edit ] Although the kritik (sometimes called a K) originated in policy debate, its use in Lincoln–Douglas debate is becoming increasingly accepted as a legitimate argument in some debate districts and states. A kritik seeks to challenge an underlying mindset, usually from the perspective of critical theory. [ 9 ] There are a few different types of kritiks. The resolutional kritik argues that a fundamental assumption of the resolution is flawed or offensive and thus it can't or shouldn't be debated or proven true. For example, in the January–February 2014 topic, "Resolved: Developing countries should prioritize environmental protection over resource extraction when the two are in conflict," a kritik of the resolution would be that the resolution uses the words "resource extraction", opening itself to an anthropocentrism kritik by assuming the world to be a resource for human use and degrading the moral character of nature. This kritik would further argue that an anthropocentric mindset would justify major harms, which, in order to avoid, would require the win go to the side presenting the criticism. The discourse kritik argues that the effects of an action one's opponent has taken during or in relation to the round should outweigh consideration of the resolution. An example of a common discourse kritik is a gendered language kritik, which could be used if an opponent's case has been written exclusively containing the male pronoun. Another example is if the opponent uses a slur (such as a derogatory term for homosexuals) in or out of the round, which opens the way to a "bad discourse" kritik. A kritik is generally composed of four parts: the role of the ballot , link , impact , and alternative . [ 10 ] In order to make a criticism, there has to be a link , or reason. A link can be a certain phrase in the resolution, something the opponent said, something conceded in cross-examination, etc. The link opens the gate to the criticism. Now that the link to the mindset being criticized has been established, there has to be a significant harm linked to that mindset, or impact . For example, if an opponent links in to statism , a harm or impact of this would be that statism justifies nuclear war or rights violations. An impact explains why the mindset is bad. In general, the alternative provides solvency for the harms proposed. Most alternatives look something like, "reject the negative," "reject statism," or something along those lines. The role of the ballot functions as framework for the kritik. A role of the ballot explains how the judge should view the debate round. If a kritik criticizes the ethics of the round, then an acceptable alternative would propose another type of ethic that should be used for reasons like better discourse. Theory shells [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources . Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed . ( October 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A theory shell proposes rules to follow in a debate. The negative can do this by criticizing something the affirmative does that does not follow their vision of the debate. Shells include arguments such as that of disclosure theory and have become increasing popular in the high school circuits. A theory shell consists of four parts: the interpretation, violation, standards and the voters [ 11 ] . A theory shell most often uses fairness and education to weigh the round [ 12 ] , but many other standards and values are used. Theory shells may also be read on the affirmative, usually read in the 1AR, with a justification of "1AR Theory Good" in the 1AC. Tricks [ edit ] Tricks are a type of argument that relies upon the technical nature of progressive debate, focusing on trying to "out-flow" your opponent, or making them concede arguments. This can stem from the idea in progressive debate that concession equals truth, which makes room for some technically abusive arguments. A common trick used by the affirmative is to say, "evaluate the debate after the 1AC," asking the judge to vote only on the content in the 1AC, automatically voting affirmative. These arguments have become extremely controversial with judges, many explicitly saying on their paradigm to strike them if you are a "tricks debater." [ 13 ] Plans [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources . Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed . ( October 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Sometimes, the affirmative advocates for a plan, which is a certain specified action which falls under the resolution. These arguments are often countered by theory (see below) or topicality . Plans originated from policy debate. Despite the growing popularity of affirmative plans, they are unacceptable in certain debate districts. In some states, the ballots used by judges instruct them to disregard affirmative plans. The only type of case that is virtually universally accepted is the value/value criterion/contention structure, and even that has its detractors. Recently, methods of winning the round have become prominent that cannot be classified as true cases, because they are used as a semi-independent part of or in addition to the case proper, and do not advocate an extensively developed position. These include the "a priori" or "prima facie" argument which attempt to demonstrate that the resolution is true/false outside of the typical syllogistic model, most commonly by collapsing it into a tautology or presenting some reason why it's nonsensical. "Theory" debate, which says that an opponent's argument or style of argumentation (e.g. talking too fast or interpreting the resolution in a certain way) is unfair or noneducational and explains why fairness or educational considerations supersedes the resolutional evaluation, has also proliferated. Like atypical cases, the merit of these types of arguments is heatedly contested, although both are common on the national circuit. Judging [ edit ] Judges fall under many categories, the most common of which are: Lay judge (a judge who does not have experience in debate of any form, and is partial to basic and/or slow arguments); usually parents tend to be lay judges, so much so that lay judge and parent judge are often considered synonymous [ 14 ] Flow judge (a judge who seeks to minimize intervention in the round by judging based solely on the arguments as made by the debaters in the round. Arguments are usually tracked in a short-hand called "the flow".) [ 1 ] Classical/traditional judge (looks strongly on the ethics of the case and the philosophy that is behind it, especially when it comes to the Value structure. They will not look highly upon spreading (which is the debate term for speed reading , at rates of 300 or more words per minute, during speeches) or progressive debate tactics like counterplan and kritik ). Policy judges look at all forms of arguments including those that come from policy debate ; policy judges tend to be flow judges. Experienced and qualified students are usually allowed to judge in the novice division. There are usually four or five elimination rounds in which the participators are marked by speaker points (0-30 is the speaker point range, however debaters are rarely assigned beneath a 26 and some states utilize a different points system—out of 40, for instance, in Idaho) and by a win or loss. Comments tend to be given by the judge to the debaters at the conclusion of the round. Comments are also written on the ballot, which is the document that the judge writes their decision on, as well as the speaker points awarded to each debater. Judges are often told before the tournament whether or not they are allowed to disclose to the participants, who won the round immediately following the decision. However, some judges do not disclose and others will regardless of what the instructions were. In some regional or national circuit tournaments with multiple divisions, less experienced judges are most commonly placed in the Novice division, while the Junior Varsity and Varsity divisions enjoy more experienced judges. Judges are assigned to a specific division based on their experience and some other criteria, and are only eligible to judge debaters within that division (a judge assigned to judge novices cannot judge varsity). Each division has its own pool of judges. At most national circuit tournaments, the judges within the varsity pool are often ranked