Policy debate - Wikipedia Jump to content From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Form of competitive debate For the general meaning, not specific to debate competition, see Political criticism . This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page . ( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article includes a list of general references but lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations . Please help improve this article by introducing more precise citations. ( September 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article needs more citations . Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed . Find sources: "Policy debate" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( September 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards . The specific problem is: Remove unreferenced sections and original research, restructure article, etc. Please help improve this article if you can. ( September 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Policy debate Organization Policy debate competitions Format Structure Glossary Evidence Flow Argument types Stock issues Case Disadvantage Counterplan Impact calculus Topicality Policy debate v t e Policy debate is an American form of debate competition in which teams of two usually advocate for or against a resolution that advocates a certain policy action by the United States federal government . It is also referred to as cross-examination debate (sometimes shortened to Cross-X or CX ) because of the three-minute questions-and-answers period following each constructive speech . Evidence presentation is a crucial part of policy debate. The main argument being debated during a round is to change or not change the status quo . When a team explains why their solvency is greater than the opposition's, they compare advantages. One team’s job is to argue that the resolution—the statement that a specific change to a national or international problem should be made—is a good idea. [ 1 ] The affirmative team generally presents a plan as a hypothetical policy proposal which falls under the resolution, while the negative team presents arguments against the implementation of the affirmative team's plan. [ 2 ] A policy debate round will typically take approximately one hour and 30 minutes and comprises a total of eight speeches and four cross-examination periods. Each individual in the debate round gives one “ constructive ” speech and one “ rebuttal ” speech. Additionally, each individual will cross-examine their opponent and be cross-examined by their opponent once. The first four speeches in a round are constructive speeches, while the final four speeches are rebuttal speeches. Cross-examination occurs directly following each constructive speech. During constructive speeches, debaters articulate and develop their main points or arguments for or against the hypothetical government action that the affirmative presents in the first speech of the round. During rebuttal speeches, debaters try to rebut (or refute ) the arguments made by the other team, while using their own arguments to try to persuade the judge to vote for their team. Usually, the Affirmative has to persuade the judge to vote for their plan in what is called the " burden of proof ", while the Negative has to persuade the judge that the affirmative plan is undesirable through the "burden of rejoinder". [ 1 ] [ 3 ] High school policy debate is sponsored by various organizations including the National Speech and Debate Association , National Association of Urban Debate Leagues , Catholic Forensic League , Stoa USA , and the National Christian Forensics and Communications Association , as well as many other regional debate and speech organizations. Collegiate policy debates are generally governed by the guidelines of National Debate Tournament (NDT) and the Cross Examination Debate Association (CEDA), which have been joined at the collegiate level. A one-person policy format is sanctioned by the National Forensic Association (NFA)) on the collegiate level as well. History [ edit ] Academic debate had its origins in intra-collegiate debating societies, in which students would engage in invitational debates against their classmates. Wake Forest University 's debate program claims to have its origins in student literary societies founded on campus in the mid-1830s, which first presented joint "orations" in 1854. [ 4 ] Many debating societies that were founded at least as early as the mid-nineteenth century are still active today, though they have generally shifted their focus to intercollegiate competitive debate. In addition to Wake Forest, the debate society at Northwestern University dates to 1855. [ 5 ] Boston College 's Fulton Debating Society, which was founded in 1868, continues to organize an annual "Fulton Prize Debate" between teams of its own students after the intercollegiate debate season has ended. Other universities continue similar traditions. Intercollegiate debates have been held since at least as early as the 1890s. History records there were debates between teams from Wake Forest University and Trinity College (later Duke University ) beginning in 1897. [ 6 ] Additionally, a debate between students from Boston College and Georgetown University occurred on May 1, 1895, in Boston. [ 7 ] Whitman College debated Washington State University , Willamette University , and the University of Idaho in the late 1890s. [ 8 ] Southwestern claims [ editorializing ] that the first debate held on its campus was between Southwestern and Fairmount College [ citation needed ] (which eventually became Wichita State University ) but [ improper synthesis? ] that debate could not have occurred [ original research? ] prior to 1895, the year Fairmount College began classes. [ 9 ] By the mid-1970s, regular rules for lengths of speeches developed. Each side (Affirmative and Negative) was afforded two opening "constructive" speeches , and two closing "rebuttal" speeches , for a total of eight speeches each debate round. Each speaker was cross-examined by their opponent for a period following his or her constructive speech. Traditionally rebuttals were half the length of constructives, but when a style of faster delivery speed became more standard in the late 1980s, that time management stricture was dropped. Wake Forest University introduced reformed speech times in both its college (9‑6 instead of 10‑5) and high school (8‑5 instead of 8‑4) tournaments, which spread rapidly to become the new de facto standards . [ citation needed ] Style and delivery [ edit ] Speed [ edit ] Main article: Spreading (debate) Policy debaters' speed of delivery will vary from league to league and tournament to tournament. In more progressive and larger tournaments, debaters will speak very quickly - a practice dubbed "spreading" (short for speed reading) - in order to read as much evidence and make as many arguments as possible within the time-constrained speech. Speed reading or spreading is normal at the majority of national circuit policy debate tournaments. Some, most commonly debaters and coaches not participating on the national debate circuit, feel that the rapid-fire delivery makes debate harder to understand for the layperson. [ 10 ] Many further claim that the increased speed encourages debaters to make several poor arguments, as opposed to a few high-quality ones. A slower style is preferred by those who want debates to be understandable to lay people and those who claim that the pedagogical purpose of the activity is to train rhetorical skills. In contrast, rapid delivery is encouraged by those who believe that increased quantity and diversity of arguments makes debates more educational. Proponents of the delivery style, commonly associated or participating in the national circuit, emphasize that spreading can help increase the quality of debates by enabling more nuanced viewpoints, rather than more general positions. Most debaters will vary their rate of delivery depending upon the judge's preferences. [ citation needed ] Flowing [ edit ] Main article: Flow (policy debate) Debaters have a specialized form of note taking, called flowing , to keep track of the arguments presented during a debate. Conventionally, a debater's flow is divided into separate flows for each different macro-argument in the debate round ( kritiks , disads , topicalities , case, etc.). There are multiple methods of flowing, but the most common style incorporates columns of arguments made in a given speech. The first constructive speech is flowed from the top of the sheet down in the first column, and the next constructive speech is flowed in the right column next to the first one. Each speech is flowed in separate columns, alternating Affirmative and Negative. Rebuttals are flowed the same. Certain shorthands for commonly used words are used to keep up with the rapid rate of delivery. The abbreviations or stand-in symbols vary. [ 11 ] Theory [ edit ] There are many accepted standards in policy debate, and there are several dominant speech argument styles. Sometimes debaters will debate about how policy debate should work. Those arguments are known as "theory" arguments, and they are most often brought up when one team believes the other team is using unfair or noneducational tactics and therefore warrant a loss or other intervention by the judge. They are also brought up to change how an argument is weighted by the judge to either assist themselves or detract from the opponents. Theory debates in-round are not rare, but whole rounds are almost never about theory itself. Theory is argued as part of the decision of the round with the hope of advancing debate the activity and the principles of rhetoric, argumentation, policymaking, and so on that the debaters are engaged in the substantive matter of the topic. Unlike Moot Court , due process is not a theory argument. [ 12 ] Burdens of the affirmative [ edit ] When the Affirmative team presents a plan, they take upon the Burden of the Policy to advocate (Justification) a significant change (Significance or Impact) to the status quo and that their plan should be adopted and hence, by default, the resolution that in general will allow for such a plan (Inherency). They must persuade that their plan is an example of the resolution (Topicality, Typicality), and they must prove that the plan is a good idea (Solvency). The Affirmative traditionally must uphold this burden as preferable to the status quo (Harms). Given that the affirmative must prove that they are preferable to the status quo, the negative team always has presumption for winning the round. The negative is automatically the winner unless the affirmative can prove they are better than the status quo. [ 13 ] Stock issues [ edit ] Main article: Stock issues One traditional way to judge policy debate is to judge the Affirmative on four issues or burdens to meet, called the stock issues . The four stock issues are modeled after U.S. court procedural aspects of administrative law in deciding cases (as opposed to Constitutional controversies): ill (Harm), blame (Inherency), cure (Solvency), cost (Significance). They are generally known as follows: Harm Does the plan acknowledge a problem, a want, a need, of some policy interest implied or alluded to or of interest from the resolution? Inherency of the status quo: Is the plan an Intrinsic change? Also, is the plan necessary? What is the Status Quo? Is the affirmative's plan happening already, and if not, why? Inherency promotes strength of originality in advocacy. Significance, or Impact upon the status quo: Does the plan warrant change? Does the plan warrant the resolution (Justification)? What is the problem in the status quo to justify adopting the plan? Is the plan important enough to even warrant consideration or make a difference? Solvency advantages: Does the plan deal with the issues presented adequately? Will the plan solve any problems in the status quo? How much of an impact (positive effect, or Significance) will the plan have? Advantages and disadvantages [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources . Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed . ( September 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Most affirmative teams today generally frame their case around advantages, [ 14 ] which are good effects of their plan. The negative team will often present disadvantages [ 15 ] which contend that the affirmative plan causes undesirable consequences. In an attempt to make sure that their advantages/disadvantages outweigh those of the other team, debaters often present extreme scenarios such as the extinction of the human race or a global nuclear war . Negation tactic [ edit ] Negation Tactic, also known as Negation Theory, contends that the negative need only negate the affirmative instead of having to negate the resolution . The acceptance of all-inclusive negation, as opposed piecemeal, allows Negative teams to run full argumentation outlines such as topical counterplans with better Solvency that affirms the resolution but still negates the Affirmative's plan. Negative strategy [ edit ] After the affirmative presents its case, the negative can down-vote the case with many different arguments, which include: Topicality : The Negative will attempt to argue that the affirmative team does not fall under the rubric of the resolution and should be rejected immediately regardless of the merits or advantages of the plan. This is a type of "meta-debate" argument, as both sides then spend time defining various words or phrases in the resolution, laying down standards for why their definition(s) or interpretation(s) is superior. The Negative side can rebut, "That's obscene! Your dog is still the topic of adoption". Most yearly topics have at least one or two commonly run Affirmative cases that are only arguably topical, so Topicality is often justified as a check or deterrent on and against such plans, which usually have quite strategic components. If run correctly, they are the strongest arguments against case only in unique circumstances. When topicality is run when the affirmative is clearly topical, which is common, it is usually used as a time waster for the affirmative. [ 16 ] Disadvantages : The negative can claim that there are disadvantages, or adverse effects of the plan, which outweigh any advantages claimed. In order to outweigh any positive effects of the affirmative case, impacts must be arguably "larger" than those of the opposing team. The negative must say what is good now, and how the affirmative's plan causes the impact of their disadvantage. A disadvantage is composed of a uniqueness (a description of the status quo in terms of the impacts of their disadvantage), a link (how the affirmative's plan activates the impact), and an impact (the adverse effect). [ 17 ] Counterplans : The negative can present a counter solution to the affirmative case's problem which does not have to affirm the resolution (The negative does not have to be topical in making a counterplan). This is generally accompanied by on-case arguments that the affirmative's plan does not solve, as well as disadvantages that link to the affirmative case but not the counterplan. Counterplans narrow down the on-case arguments to: advantages the counterplan can not borrow, the inherency, and the solvency. Upon the negative running a counterplan, most debates boil down to the solvency of the affirmative case, and the disadvantages. Counterplans must be competitive with the plan. That means that the counterplan must either be mutually exclusive with the affirmative (for example, one cannot both increase oil production (a hypothetical plan) and decrease oil production (a hypothetical counterplan) or be undesirable in conjunction with the plan (the negative must win that the inclusion of the plan would cause some form of harm that the counterplan alone would avoid). There is ongoing disagreement between models of textual competition, functional competition, or any combination between the two. [ 18 ] Kritiks : The negative can claim that the affirmative holds a certain mindset or assumption that should be grounds for rejection or a different mutually exclusive alternative to the Affirmative's plan. Kritiks are sometimes a reason to reject the entire affirmative advocacy without evaluating its policy; other times, kritiks can be evaluated within the same strictures as the affirmative case as to who is hypocritical or irrelevant or prejudiced, etc. Examples of some areas of literature for kritiks include biopower , racism , centralized government , and anthropocentrism . Kritiks arose in the early 1990s, with the first kritiks based in deconstructionist philology about the ambiguity of the language used (diction) and were championed by debaters Shane Stafford and Bill Shanahan. A kritik is built with a link (how the affirmative activates the impacts), an impact (the impact of a kritik is slightly different to regular impacts. They are more similar to harms and the impacts are saying that the affirmative team prolongs these harms), and the alternative (a way to fix the impacts, often in a very extreme manner. An example would be destroying the entire American government to fix institutionalized racism). Theory: Sometimes the subject matter of the affirmative's case will create uneven Grounds at the beginning. In these cases, the negative can object to the procedure or content of the affirmative case. These objections are part of a Grounds theory debate in that they try to delineate what has been disavailed from fouling Grounds in a debate round. Evidence [ edit ] Main article: Evidence (policy debate) This section does not cite any sources . Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed . ( September 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Evidence in debates is organized into units called cards (because such evidence was originally printed on note cards, though the practice has long been replaced by digital storage). Cards are designed to condense an author's argument so that debaters have an easy way to access the information. A card is composed of three parts: the argument or evidence summary, the evidence that supports the argument, and the citation. The argument part, sometimes called the tag(line) , is the debater's summary of the argument presented in the body. A tag is usually only one or two sentences. The citation contains all relevant reference citation information (that is, the author, date of publication, journal, title, etc.). Although every card should contain a complete citation, only the author's name and date of publication are typically spoken aloud in a speech. Some teams will also read the author's qualifications if they wish to emphasize this information. Qualifications are only included in trying to increase the weight of your cards against your opponents'. The body is a fragment of the author's original text. The length of a body can vary greatly—cards can be as short as a few sentences and as long as two or more pages. Most cards are between one and five paragraphs in length. The body of a card is often underlined or highlighted in order to eliminate unnecessary or redundant sentences when the card is read in a round. In a round, the tag is read first, followed by the citation and the body. Often, especially on the national circuit, a debater will share any cards they plan to read with their opponents and the judge immediately before their speech. If cards are not shared before the speech, it