Systems theory - Wikipedia Jump to content From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Interdisciplinary study of systems This article has an unclear citation style . The references used may be made clearer with a different or consistent style of citation and footnoting . ( July 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Complex systems Topics Self-organization Emergence Collective behavior Social dynamics Collective intelligence Collective action Self-organized criticality Herd mentality Phase transition Agent-based modelling Synchronization Ant colony optimization Particle swarm optimization Swarm behaviour Collective consciousness Networks Scale-free networks Social network analysis Small-world networks Centrality Motifs Graph theory Scaling Robustness Systems biology Dynamic networks Adaptive networks Evolution and adaptation Artificial neural network Evolutionary computation Genetic algorithms Genetic programming Artificial life Machine learning Evolutionary developmental biology Artificial intelligence Evolutionary robotics Evolvability Pattern formation Fractals Reaction–diffusion systems Partial differential equations Dissipative structures Percolation Cellular automata Spatial ecology Self-replication Geomorphology Systems theory and cybernetics Autopoiesis Conversation theory Entropy Feedback Goal-oriented Homeostasis Information theory Operationalization Second-order cybernetics Self-reference System dynamics Systems science Systems thinking Sensemaking Variety Theory of computation Nonlinear dynamics Time series analysis Ordinary differential equations Phase space Attractors Population dynamics Chaos Multistability Bifurcation Coupled map lattices Game theory Prisoner's dilemma Rational choice theory Bounded rationality Evolutionary game theory v t e Systems theory is the transdisciplinary [ 1 ] study of systems , i.e., cohesive groups of interrelated, interdependent components that can be natural or artificial . Every system has causal boundaries, is influenced by its context , defined by its structure, function and role, and expressed through its relations with other systems. A system is "more than the sum of its parts" when it expresses synergy or emergent behavior . [ 2 ] Changing one component of a system may affect other components or the whole system. It may be possible to predict these changes in patterns of behavior. For systems that learn and adapt, the growth and the degree of adaptation depend upon how well the system is engaged with its environment and other contexts influencing its organization. Some systems support other systems, maintaining the other system to prevent failure. The goals of systems theory are to model a system's dynamics, constraints , conditions, and relations; and to elucidate principles (such as purpose, measure, methods, tools) that can be discerned and applied to other systems at every level of nesting, and in a wide range of fields for achieving optimized equifinality . [ 3 ] General systems theory is about developing broadly applicable concepts and principles, as opposed to concepts and principles specific to one domain of knowledge. It distinguishes dynamic or active systems from static or passive systems. Active systems are activity structures or components that interact in behaviours and processes or interrelate through formal contextual boundary conditions (attractors). Passive systems are structures and components that are being processed. For example, a computer program is passive when it is a file stored on the hard drive and active when it runs in memory. [ 4 ] The field is related to systems thinking , machine logic, and systems engineering . Overview [ edit ] This section is written like a personal reflection, personal essay, or argumentative essay that states a Wikipedia editor's personal feelings or presents an original argument about a topic. Please help improve it by rewriting it in an encyclopedic style . ( November 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Systems theory is manifest in the work of practitioners in many disciplines, for example the works of physician Alexander Bogdanov , biologist Ludwig von Bertalanffy , linguist Béla H. Bánáthy , and sociologist Talcott Parsons ; in the study of ecological systems by Howard T. Odum , Eugene Odum ; in Fritjof Capra 's study of organizational theory ; in the study of management by Peter Senge ; in interdisciplinary areas such as human resource development in the works of Richard A. Swanson ; and in the works of educators Debora Hammond and Alfonso Montuori. As a transdisciplinary , interdisciplinary, and multiperspectival endeavor, systems theory brings together principles and concepts from ontology , the philosophy of science , physics , computer science , biology , and engineering , as well as geography , sociology , political science , psychotherapy (especially family systems therapy ), and economics . Systems theory promotes dialogue between autonomous areas of study as well as within systems science itself. In this respect, with the possibility of misinterpretations, von Bertalanffy [ 5 ] believed a general theory of systems "should be an important regulative device in science," to guard against superficial analogies that "are useless in science and harmful in their practical consequences." Others remain closer to the direct systems concepts developed by the original systems theorists. For example, Ilya Prigogine , of the Center for Complex Quantum Systems at the University of Texas , has studied emergent properties , suggesting that they offer analogues for living systems . The distinction of autopoiesis as made by Humberto Maturana and Francisco Varela represent further developments in this field. Important names in contemporary systems science include Russell Ackoff , Ruzena Bajcsy , Béla H. Bánáthy , Gregory Bateson , Anthony Stafford Beer , Peter Checkland , Barbara Grosz , Brian Wilson , Robert L. Flood , Allenna Leonard , Radhika Nagpal , Fritjof Capra , Warren McCulloch , Kathleen Carley , Michael C. Jackson , Katia Sycara , and Edgar Morin among others. With the modern foundations for a general theory of systems following World War I, Ervin László , in the preface for Bertalanffy's book, Perspectives on General System Theory , points out that the translation of "general system theory" from German into English has "wrought a certain amount of havoc": [ 6 ] It (General System Theory) was criticized as pseudoscience and said to be nothing more than an admonishment to attend to things in a holistic way. Such criticisms would have lost their point had it been recognized that von Bertalanffy's general system theory is a perspective or paradigm, and that such basic conceptual frameworks play a key role in the development of exact scientific theory. .. Allgemeine Systemtheorie is not directly consistent with an interpretation often put on 'general system theory,' to wit, that it is a (scientific) "theory of general systems." To criticize it as such is to shoot at straw men. Von Bertalanffy opened up something much broader and of much greater significance than a single theory (which, as we now know, can always be falsified and has usually an ephemeral existence): he created a new paradigm for the development of theories. Theorie (or Lehre ) "has a much broader meaning in German than the closest English words 'theory' and 'science'," just as Wissenschaft (or 'Science'). [ 6 ] These ideas refer to an organized body of knowledge and "any systematically presented set of concepts, whether empirically , axiomatically , or philosophically " represented, while many associate Lehre with theory and science in the etymology of general systems, though it also does not translate from the German very well; its "closest equivalent" translates to 'teaching', but "sounds dogmatic and off the mark." [ 6 ] An adequate overlap in meaning is found within the word " nomothetic ", which can mean "having the capability to posit long-lasting sense." While the idea of a "general systems theory" might have lost many of its root meanings in the translation, by defining a new way of thinking about science and scientific paradigms , systems theory became a widespread term used for instance to describe the interdependence of relationships created in organizations . A system in this frame of reference can contain regularly interacting or interrelating groups of activities. For example, in noting the influence in the evolution of "an individually oriented industrial psychology [into] a systems and developmentally oriented organizational psychology ," some theorists recognize that organizations have complex social systems; separating the parts from the whole reduces the overall effectiveness of organizations. [ 7 ] This difference, from conventional models that center on individuals, structures, departments and units, separates in part from the whole, instead of recognizing the interdependence between groups of individuals, structures and processes that enable an organization to function. László explains that the new systems view of organized complexity went "one step beyond the Newtonian view of organized simplicity" which reduced the parts from the whole, or understood the whole without relation to the parts. The relationship between organisations and their environments can be seen as the foremost source of complexity and interdependence. In most cases, the whole has properties that cannot be known from analysis of the constituent elements in isolation. [ 8 ] Béla H. Bánáthy , who argued—along with the founders of the systems society—that "the benefit of humankind" is the purpose of science, has made significant and far-reaching contributions to the area of systems theory. For the Primer Group at the International Society for the System Sciences , Bánáthy defines a perspective that iterates this view: [ 9 ] [ full citation needed ] The systems view is a world-view that is based on the discipline of SYSTEM INQUIRY. Central to systems inquiry is the concept of SYSTEM. In the most general sense, system means a configuration of parts connected and joined together by a web of relationships. The Primer Group defines system as a family of relationships among the members acting as a whole. Von Bertalanffy defined system as "elements in standing relationship." Applications [ edit ] Art [ edit ] Main article: Systems art Biology [ edit ] Main article: Systems biology Systems biology is a movement that draws on several trends in bioscience research. Proponents describe systems biology as a biology-based interdisciplinary study field that focuses on complex interactions in biological systems , claiming that it uses a new perspective ( holism instead of reduction ). Particularly from the year 2000 onwards, the biosciences use the term widely and in a variety of contexts. An often stated ambition of systems biology is the modelling and discovery of emergent properties which represents properties of a system whose theoretical description requires the only possible useful techniques to fall under the remit of systems biology. It is thought that Ludwig von Bertalanffy may have created the term systems biology in 1928. [ 10 ] Subdisciplines of systems biology include: Systems neuroscience Systems pharmacology Ecology [ edit ] Main article: Systems ecology Systems ecology is an interdisciplinary field of ecology that takes a holistic approach to the study of ecological systems , especially ecosystems ; [ 11 ] [ 12 ] [ 13 ] it can be seen as an application of general systems theory to ecology. Central to the systems ecology approach is the idea that an ecosystem is a complex system exhibiting emergent properties . Systems ecology focuses on interactions and transactions within and between biological and ecological systems, and is especially concerned with the way the functioning of ecosystems can be influenced by human interventions. It uses and extends concepts from thermodynamics and develops other macroscopic descriptions of complex systems. Chemistry [ edit ] Main article: Systems chemistry Systems chemistry is the science of studying networks of interacting molecules, to create new functions from a set (or library) of molecules with different hierarchical levels and emergent properties. [ 14 ] Systems chemistry is also related to the origin of life ( abiogenesis ). [ 15 ] Engineering [ edit ] Main article: Systems engineering Systems engineering is an interdisciplinary approach and means for enabling the realisation and deployment of successful systems . It can be viewed as the application of engineering techniques to the engineering of systems, as well as the application of a systems approach to engineering efforts. [ 16 ] Systems engineering integrates other disciplines and specialty groups into a team effort, forming a structured development process that proceeds from concept to production to operation and disposal. Systems engineering considers both the business and the technical needs of all customers, with the goal of providing a quality product that meets the user's needs. [ 17 ] [ 18 ] User-centered design process [ edit ] Systems thinking is a crucial part of user-centered design processes and is necessary to understand the whole impact of a new human computer interaction (HCI) information system . [ 19 ] Overlooking this and developing software without insights input from the future users (mediated by user experience designers) is a serious design flaw that can lead to complete failure of information systems, increased stress and mental illness for users of information systems leading to increased costs and a huge waste of resources. [ 20 ] It is currently surprisingly uncommon for organizations and governments to investigate the project management decisions leading to serious design flaws and lack of usability. [ citation needed ] The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers estimates that roughly 15% of the estimated $1 trillion used to develop information systems every year is completely wasted and the produced systems are discarded before implementation by entirely preventable mistakes. [ 21 ] According to the CHAOS report published in 2018 by the Standish Group, a vast majority of information systems fail or partly fail according to their survey: {{cite web |last1=Portman |first1=Henny |title=Review CHAOS Report 2018 |url=https://hennyportman.wordpress.com/2020/01/03/review-chaos-report-2018/ |website=Henny Portman s Blog |date=3 January 2020 |access-date=11 September 2020 |archive-date=29 September 2020 |archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20200929194449/https://hennyportman.wordpress.com/2020/01/03/review-chaos-report-2018/ |url-status=live }} /ref>"}},"i":0}}]}'/> Pure success is the combination of high customer satisfaction with high return on value to the organization. Related figures for the year 2017 are: successful: 14%, challenged: 67%, failed 19%. [ 22 ] Mathematics [ edit ] Main article: System dynamics System dynamics is an approach to understanding the nonlinear behaviour of complex systems over time using stocks, flows , internal feedback loops , and time delays. [ 23 ] The field of category theory has recently been used by researchers including David Jaz Myers [ 24 ] to formalise concepts from systems theory. Social sciences and humanities [ edit ] Systems theory in anthropology Systems theory in archaeology Systems theory in political science Psychology [ edit ] Main article: Systems psychology Systems psychology is a branch of psychology that studies human behaviour and experience in complex systems . It received inspiration from systems theory and systems thinking, as well as the basics of theoretical work from Roger Barker , Gregory Bateson , Humberto Maturana and others. It makes an approach in psychology in which groups and individuals receive consideration as systems in homeostasis . Systems psychology "includes the domain of engineering psychology , but in addition seems more concerned with societal systems [ 25 ] and with the study of motivational, affective, cognitive and group behavior that holds the name engineering psychology." [ 26 ] In systems psychology, characteristics of organizational behaviour (such as individual needs, rewards, expectations , and attributes of the people interacting with the systems ) "considers this process in order to create an effective system." [ 27 ] Informatics [ edit ] System theory has been applied in the field of neuroinformatics and connectionist cognitive science. Attempts are being made in neurocognition to merge connectionist cognitive neuroarchitectures with the approach of system theory and dynamical systems theory . [ 28 ] History [ edit ] Precursors [ edit ] Timeline Predecessors Baron d'Holbach (1723/1789), Saint-Simon (1760–1825), Auguste Comte (1798–1857), Karl Marx (1818–1883), Friedrich Engels (1820–1895), Herbert Spencer (1820–1903), Rudolf Clausius (1822–1888), Vilfredo Pareto (1848–1923), Émile Durkheim (1858–1917), Alexander Bogdanov (1873–1928), Nicolai Hartmann (1882–1950), Robert Maynard Hutchins (1929–1951), among others Founders 1946–1953: Macy conferences 1948: Norbert Wiener publishes Cybernetics: Or Control and Communication in the Animal and the Machine 1951: Talcott Parsons publishes The Social System [ 29 ] 1954: The Society for the Advancement of General Systems Theory is established by Ludwig von Bertalanffy , Anatol Rapoport , Ralph W. Gerard , Kenneth Boulding . 1955: William Ross Ashby publishes Introduction to Cybernetics 1968: Bertalanffy publishes General System Theory: Foundations, Development, Applications Other contributors 1970–1990 Second-order cybernetics ( Heinz von Foerster , Gregory Bateson , Humberto Maturana , and others) 1971–1973 Cybersyn , rudimentary internet and cybernetic system for democratic economic planning developed by Stafford Beer in Chile under the Allende government 1970s: Catastrophe theory ( René Thom , E.C. Zeeman ) Dynamical systems in mathematics. 1977: Ilya Prigogine received the Nobel Prize for his works on self-organization , conciliating important systems theory concepts with system thermodynamics . 1980s: Chaos theory ( David Ruelle , Edward Lorenz , Mitchell Feigenbaum , Steve Smale , James A. Yorke ) 1986: Context theory ( Anthony Wilden ) 1988: International Society for Systems Science is established. 1990: Complex adaptive systems ( John H. Holland , Murray Gell-Mann , W. Brian Arthur ) Systems thinking can date back to antiquity, whether considering the first systems of written communication with Sumerian cuneiform to Maya numerals , or the feats of engineering with the Egyptian pyramids . Differentiated from Western rationalist traditions of philosophy, C. West Churchman often identified with the I Ching as a systems approach sharing a frame of reference similar to pre-Socratic philosophy and Heraclitus . [ 30 ] : 12–13 Ludwig von Bertalanffy traced systems concepts to the philosophy of Gottfried Leibniz and Nicholas of Cusa 's coincidentia oppositorum . While modern systems can seem considerably more complicated, they may embed themselves in history. Figures like James Joule and Sadi Carnot represent an important step to introduce the systems approach into the (rationalist) hard sciences of the 19th century, also known as the energy transformation . Then, the thermodynamics of this century, by Rudolf Clausius , Josiah Gibbs and others, established the system reference model as a formal scientific object. Similar ideas are found in learning theories that developed from the same fundamental concepts, emphasising how understanding results from knowing concepts both in part and as a whole. In fact, Bertalanffy's organismic psychology paralleled the learning theory of Jean Piaget . [ 31 ] Some consider interdisciplinary perspectives critical in breaking away from industrial age models and thinking, wherein history represents history and math represents math, while