Philosophical Library - Wikipedia Jump to content From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American book publisher (established 1941) For the organization "Philosophical and Religious Free Library", see The Philosophical Library . This article needs more citations . Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed . Find sources: "Philosophical Library" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2026 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Philosophical Library Founded 1941 (85 years ago) ( 1941 ) Founder Dagobert D. Runes Country of origin U.S. Headquarters location New York City, U.S. Publication types Books Nonfiction topics Psychology philosophy religion history Official website philosophicallibrary .com Philosophical Library is a publisher , based in New York City, United States, specializing in psychology, philosophy, religion, and history. History and operations [ edit ] It was founded in 1941 in New York City by Dagobert D. Runes [ 1 ] with the intention of publishing the works of European intellectuals fleeing racial and religious persecution in the 1930s. According to Rick Lewis in an article for Philosophy Now , "Runes knew almost everyone in émigré circles, and hit on the idea of publishing books by the brilliant European exiles he knew." In particular, Lewis says, Runes was close to Albert Einstein and thought it fitting to publish his work in the states. As such, Runes created Philosophical Library in 1941. [ 2 ] Portfolio [ edit ] Philosophical Library has published works for twenty-two Nobel Prize winners and other key figures, including Einstein, Jean-Paul Sartre , Simone de Beauvoir , Arnold Schoenberg , Paramahansa Yogananda and Albert Schweitzer . Classic books include Einstein's Out of My Later Years , Khalil Gibran 's Tears and Laughter , Max Planck 's Classical Mathematics , and Sartre's Being and Nothingness (1943). The company also curates and publishes various collections of work, such as those themed around continental philosophy or Buddhist philosophy . Since 2007, the company has reissued out-of-print titles. References [ edit ] ↑ "Dr. Dagobert Runes, Founder of the Philosophical Library" . The New York Times . September 27, 1982. ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved April 10, 2023 . ↑ "The Philosophical Library | Issue 103 | Philosophy Now" . Philosophy Now . Retrieved July 26, 2024 . External links [ edit ] philosophicallibrary .com , the company's official website Authority control databases International VIAF National Israel Other ELMCIP Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Philosophical_Library oldid=1362984466 " Categories : American companies established in 1941 Book publishing companies based in New York City Publishing companies established in 1941 Religious publishing companies Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from May 2026 All articles needing additional references Use mdy dates from May 2026 Search Search Philosophical Library 1 language Add topic