Debate - Wikipedia Jump to content From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Formal conversation, often between opposing viewpoints, on a topic For other uses, see Debate (disambiguation) . A Debate among Scholars , Razmnama illustration Two men engage in recreational debate Debate is a process that involves formal discourse , discussion, and oral addresses on a particular collection of topics, often with a moderator and an audience. In a debate, arguments are put forward for opposing viewpoints. Historically, debates have occurred in public meetings, academic institutions, debate halls, coffeehouses , competitions , and legislative assemblies . [ 1 ] Debates have also been conducted for educational and recreational purposes, [ 2 ] usually associated with educational establishments and debating societies. [ 3 ] These debates emphasize logical consistency, factual accuracy, and emotional appeal to an audience. [ 4 ] [ 5 ] Modern competitive debate also includes rules for participants to discuss and decide upon the framework of the debate (how it will be judged). [ 5 ] The term "debate" may also apply to a more continuous, inclusive, and less formalized process through which issues are explored and resolved across a range of agencies and among the general public . For example, the European Commission in 2021 published a Green Paper on Ageing , intended to generate such a debate on "policies to address the challenges and opportunities of ageing " in the upcoming years. [ 6 ] Pope Francis has also referred to the "need for forthright and honest debate" on society and the environment in his 2015 encyclical letter Laudato si' . [ 7 ] History [ edit ] Debating in various forms has a long history that can be traced back to the philosophical and political debates of Ancient Greece , such as Athenian Democracy or the Shastrartha in Ancient India . In Imperial China 's Han Dynasty , debate amongst scholars was most famously portrayed in a series of debates known as the Discourses on Salt and Iron , held in 81 BCE. Named by Emperor Zhao for its two most famous debates, those debates focused on the reformation of the economic policies implemented by Zhao's predecessor, Emperor Wu . [ 8 ] Modern forms of debating and the establishment of debating societies in the Western world occurred during the Age of Enlightenment in the 18th century. [ 9 ] Emergence of debating societies [ edit ] Debate Tonight: Whether a man's wig should be dressed with honey or mustard! , a 1795 cartoon satirizing the content of debates Trinity College Dublin boasts two of Europe's oldest debating societies: The Hist in 1770, inspired by a debating club created by Edmund Burke in 1747, and The Phil , founded in 1683. The Society of Cogers was founded in London in 1755 and still operates today. Debating societies had emerged in London in the early 18th century, and soon became a prominent societal fixture of life in London. [ 10 ] Although debating societies had existed in London since at least 1740, they were exclusive and secretive societies. However, by the mid-18th century, London fostered a vibrant debating society culture, largely due to increased membership from London's growing middle class. [ 10 ] The topics debated covered a broad spectrum, and debating societies allowed participants from all genders and social backgrounds, making them an example of the enlarged public sphere of the Age of Enlightenment . [ 11 ] Debating societies were a phenomenon associated with the simultaneous rise of the public sphere . [ 12 ] A sphere of discussion, separate from traditional authorities and accessible to all people, acted as a platform for criticism and the development of new ideas and philosophy. [ 13 ] John Henley , a clergyman, [ 14 ] founded an Oratory in 1726 with the principal aim of "reforming the manner in which public presentations should be performed". [ 15 ] : 63 He extensively utilized the print industry to advertise the events of his Oratory, establishing it as a ubiquitous part of the London public sphere. Henley also played a crucial role in shaping the space of the debating club; he introduced two platforms to his room in the Newport district of London for the staging of debates and organized the entrances to facilitate the collection of admission fees. These modifications were further carried out when Henley relocated his enterprise to Lincoln's Inn Fields . With the public now willing to pay for entertainment, Henley capitalized on the growing commercialization of British society. [ 15 ] : 65–66 By the 1770s, debating societies had become a firmly established part of London society. [ 16 ] The year 1785 was pivotal: The Morning Chronicle announced on March 26: [ 17 ] The Rage for public debate now shows itself in all quarters of the metropolis. Exclusive of the oratorical assemblies at Carlisle House, Freemasons Hall, the Forum, Spring Gardens, the Casino, the Mitre Tavern, and other polite places of debating rendezvous , we hear that new Schools of Eloquence are preparing to be opened in St. Giles, Clare-Market, Hockley in the Hole, Whitechapel, Rag-Fair, Duke's Place, Billingsgate, and the Back of the Borough. Many subjects were debated in the London Debating Societies of the 18th century. This is a cover to a panegyric on marriage and family life, c. 1780 . In 1780, 35 distinct societies advertised and hosted debates accommodating between 650 and 1200 individuals. [ 18 ] The topic for debate was introduced by a president or moderator, who then moderated the discussion. Speakers were allotted specific time frames to present their arguments, and, following the debate, a vote was conducted to reach a conclusion or to adjourn the topic for further deliberation. [ 19 ] Speakers were prohibited from slandering or insulting other speakers or straying from the designated topic, underscoring the premium placed on politeness by late 18th-century debaters. [ 16 ] Student debating societies [ edit ] Main articles: College literary societies and List of college literary societies Princeton University in the future United States of America was home to several short-lived student debating societies throughout the mid-1700s. The American Whig Society at the university was co-founded in 1765 by future revolutionary James Madison . [ 20 ] The Dialectic and Philanthropic Societies were formed at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill in 1795 and are still active. They are considered the first of the post-revolutionary debating societies. [ citation needed ] A debate at the Cambridge Union Society ( c. 1887 ) The first student debating society in Great Britain was the St Andrews Debating Society , formed in 1794 as the Literary Society . The Cambridge Union Society was founded in 1815 and claims to be the oldest continually operating debating society in the World. [ 21 ] Over the next few decades, similar debate societies emerged at several other prominent universities, including the Oxford Union , the Durham Union , the Yale Political Union , and the Conférence Olivaint . Political debate [ edit ] Part of a series on Rhetoric History Ancient India Ancient Greece Asianism Atticism Attic orators Calliope Classical rhetoric Sophists Ancient Rome The age of Cicero Second Sophistic Middle Ages Byzantine rhetoric Trivium Renaissance Studia humanitatis Modern period Concepts Captatio benevolentiae Chironomia Decorum Delectare Docere Device Eloquence Eloquentia perfecta Eunoia Enthymeme Facilitas Fallacy Informal Figure of speech Scheme Trope Five canons Inventio Dispositio Elocutio Memoria Pronuntiatio Hypsos Imitatio Kairos Method of loci Modes Operations Persuasion Ethos Pathos Logos Situation Style Grand Sotto voce Topos Genres Apologetics Debate Declamation Controversia Deliberative Demagogy Dialectic Socratic method Dissoi logoi Elocution Epideictic Encomium Panegyric Eulogy Farewell speech Forensic Funeral oration Homiletics‎ Sermon Invitational Lecture Public Lightning talk Maiden speech Oratory Polemic Diatribe Eristic Philippic Progymnasmata Suasoria Propaganda Spin Resignation speech Stump speech War-mongering Criticism Cluster Dramatic Pentadic Frame Genre Ideological Metaphoric Mimesis Narrative Neo-Aristotelian Rhetoricians Aeschines Aelius Aristides Antiphon Aristotle Aspasia Augustine Bakhtin Booth Brueggemann Burke Cicero de Man Demosthenes Derrida Dio Chrysostom Erasmus Gorgias Hobbes Hypereides Isocrates Lucian Lysias McLuhan Ong Perelman Pizan Protagoras Quintilian Ramus Richards Seneca the Elder Smith Toulmin Vico Weaver Works Gorgias (380 BC) Phaedrus (c. 370 BC) Rhetoric (c. 350 BC) Rhetoric to Alexander (c. 350 BC) De Sophisticis Elenchis (c. 350 BC) Topics (c. 350 BC) De Inventione (84 BC) Rhetorica ad Herennium (80 BC) De Oratore (55 BC) A Dialogue Concerning Oratorical Partitions (c. 50 BC) De Optimo Genere Oratorum (46 BC) Orator (46 BC) On the Sublime (c. 50) Institutio Oratoria (95) Panegyrici Latini (100–400) Dialogus de oratoribus (102) De doctrina Christiana (426) De vulgari eloquentia (1305) Copia: Foundations of the Abundant Style (1521) Language as Symbolic Action (1966) A General Rhetoric (1970) Subfields Argumentation Cognitive Contrastive Constitutive Digital Feminist Native American New Health and medicine Pedagogy Procedural Science Technology Therapy Visual Composition Related Ars dictaminis Communication studies Composition studies Doxa Glossary of rhetorical terms Glossophobia List of feminist rhetoricians List of speeches Oral skills Orator Pistis Public rhetoric Rhetoric of social intervention model Rhetrickery Rogerian argument Seduction Speechwriting Talking point TED Terministic screen Toulmin model Wooden iron v t e Parliamentary debate [ edit ] In parliaments and other legislatures , members debate proposals regarding legislation before voting on resolutions, which become laws . Debates are usually conducted by proposing a law, or changes to a law known as amendments . Parliamentary-style debates are structured with two opposing sides, the Leader of Opposition (LO) and the Government (GOV). [ 22 ] After each side is allowed to speak once, members are permitted to give reply speeches to the opposing side's points. Afterward, members of the parliament discuss the proposal before casting their votes for or against such a law. [ 22 ] The first example of parliamentary debate took place in Liverpool in 1882. [ 23 ] Although Britain invented the system of parliamentary debate, it is not the only modern country to use a parliamentary system. Countries today that use a parliamentary system and parliamentary debate include Canada , Italy , Japan , Latvia , the Netherlands , and New Zealand . [ 24 ] In addition to government settings, the structure of parliamentary debate has also influenced academic debate formats. The Asian Parliamentary style which includes two teams of three speakers who engage in speeches. This style of debating is widely practiced in Asian Countries such as Japan, Malaysia and Taiwan. [ 25 ] Participatory democracy [ edit ] See also: Participatory Democracy Participatory democracy is a form of government in which citizens are directly involved in political decision-making, often through mechanisms such as public debate. In France, the procedure for public debate was defined in the Law of February 2, 1995 relating to the re-enforcement of the protection of the environment (commonly known as the Barnier Law, after the then minister for the environment). [ 26 ] Emergency debating [ edit ] In some countries (e.g., Canada [ 27 ] and the UK [ 28 ] ), members of parliament may request debates on urgent matters of national importance. According to Standing Order rules, an emergency debate may take precedence on Friday, or if the Speaker decides, at the next sitting within normal hours. The Speaker also determines when any other regular business, superseded by the emergency debate, is considered or discarded. [ 29 ] Debate between candidates for high office [ edit ] Main article: Leaders debate In jurisdictions that elect holders of high political office, such as the President or Prime Minister , candidates sometimes debate in public, usually during a general election campaign. U.S. presidential debates [ edit ] Main article: United States presidential election debates Walter Mondale (left) and Ronald Reagan during the 1984 United States presidential debates Since the 1976 general election , debates between presidential candidates have been a part of U.S. presidential campaigns. Unlike debates sponsored at the high school or collegiate level, the participants and format are not independently defined. Nevertheless, in a campaign season heavily dominated by television advertisements , talk radio , sound bites , and spin , they still offer a rare opportunity for citizens to see and hear the major candidates side by side. The format of the presidential debates, though defined differently in every election, is typically more restrictive than many traditional formats, forbidding participants to ask each other questions and restricting discussion of particular topics to short time frames. The presidential debates were initially moderated in 1976 , 1980 , and 1984 by the League of Women Voters , and the Commission on Presidential Debates (CPD) was established in 1987 by the Republican and Democratic parties. The presidential debate's primary purpose is to sponsor and produce debates for the United States presidential and vice-presidential candidates in a nonpartisan environment. The organization, which is a nonprofit, nonpartisan corporation, sponsored all of the presidential debates in 1988 , 1992 , 1996 , 2000 , 2004 , 2008 , 2012 , 2016 , 2020 and 2024 . However, in announcing its withdrawal from sponsoring the debates, the League of Women Voters stated that it was withdrawing "because the demands of the two campaign organizations would perpetrate a fraud on the American voter." [ 30 ] In 2004, the Citizens' Debate Commission was formed in the hope of establishing an independent sponsor for presidential debates, with a more voter-centric role in the definition of the participants, format, and rules. Competitive debate [ edit ] In competitive debates , teams compete against each other and are judged the winner by a list of criteria that is usually based around the concepts of "content, style, and strategy". [ 31 ] There are numerous styles of competitive debating, organizations, and rules, and competitive debates are held across the world at all levels. [ 32 ] Competitive debating is most commonly found in secondary schools and institutions of higher education, especially in the United States , where competitive debating is often known as forensics or speech and debate . Many countries often also hold tournaments in competitive debates between different schools. [ 33 ] [ 34 ] [ 35 ] [ 36 ] Australasia debating [ edit ] Main article: Australia–Asia debating The Australasian style of debate consists of two teams of three people, debating a topic. The topic is presented in the form of an affirmative statement beginning with "That" or "This House", for example, "That cats are better than dogs", or "This House should raise taxes". Most topics are usually specific to local Australian regions to facilitate participant and audience interest. [ 37 ] Each of the six speakers (three affirmative and three negative) speak in succession to each other, beginning with the Affirmative Team. The speaking order is as follows: First Affirmative, First Negative, Second Affirmative, Second Negative, Third Affirmative, and finally Third Negative. [ 38 ] The debate is finished with a closing argument by the last speaker from each team. "Points of Information" (an interrupting question), more commonly known as "POIs", are used in Australian and New Zealand Secondary School level debating. The context in which the Australasian style of debate is used varies, but in Australia and New Zealand, it is primarily used at the primary and secondary school levels. [ 39 ] European square debating [ edit ] European square debating has a Paris-style inspired format with four teams. France, the United Kingdom, and Germany are always represented, in addition to one other major European nation (for example, Russia). These "Nations" then confront each other in a policy debate on European issues, as parts of two broad coalitions. [ 40 ] [ 41 ] Each team is composed of two speakers (the Prime Minister and the Foreign Secretary). The debate starts with the first speaker from France, followed by the first speaker of Germany (the opposite side), followed by the second speaker of France, and the second speaker of Germany. The debate continues with the first speaker of the United Kingdom, followed by the first speaker of Russia, and it goes on with the respective second speakers. Each debater speaks for 5 minutes. The first and the last minutes are protected time: no Points of Information may be asked. During the rest of the speech, the speaker may be interrupted by Points of Information (POIs) from the opposite countries (debaters from France and the UK may ask POIs from debaters representing Germany and Russia, and vice versa, respectively). The format forces each debater to develop a winning strategy while respecting the coalition. This format was commonly developed by the Franco-British Comparative Project [ 42 ] and Declan McCavanna, Chairman of the FDA [ 43 ] and featured France, the UK, Germany, Russia and Italy. Impromptu debating [ edit ] Main article: Impromptu debate Impromptu debating is a relatively informal style of debate compared to other highly structured formats. The topic is given to participants 15 to 20 minutes before the debate begins. The format is straightforward: each team member speaks for 5 minutes, with speakers alternating between sides. This is followed by a 10-minute discussion period (similar to the "open cross-examination" time in other formats) and then a 5-minute break, comparable to preparation time in other formats. After the break, each team delivers a 4-minute rebuttal. [ 44 ] Impromptu debate is often considered more akin to public speaking, as speeches can range from stand-up routines to discussions about the reputations of nations, depending on the topic assigned to the contestants. At the start of the event, contestants receive a list of abstract topics from which they select one and prepare a speech. [ 44 ] Lincoln–Douglas debating [ edit ] Main article: Lincoln–Douglas debate format This section needs more citations . Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed . ( May 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Lincoln-Douglas debating is primarily a form of United States high school debate (though there is a collegiate Lincoln-Douglas debate) and is named after the 1858 Lincoln-Douglas debates . It is a 1-on-1 event that applies philosophical theories to real-world issues. The debaters normally alternate sides from round to round as either the "affirmative", which upholds the resolution, or the "negative", which attacks it. The resolution, which changes bimonthly, generally asks whether a certain policy or action conforms to a specific value. National Forensic Association Lincoln-Douglas debate (NFA-LD), the collegiate Lincoln-Douglas debate, uses one resolution per academic year, and is a 1-on-1 form of policy debate. [ 45 ] Though established as an alternative to policy debate, there has been a strong movement to embrace certain techniques that originated in policy debate. Traditional LD debate attempts to be free of policy debate "jargon". Lincoln-Douglas speeches can range in speed from a conversational pace to well over 300 words per minute. This technique of fast-talking is often called spreading and is also prevalent in policy debates. Mace debating [ edit ] The Mace debating style is prominent in Britain and Ireland