Evolutionary epistemology - Wikipedia Jump to content From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ambiguous term applied to several concepts This article needs more citations . Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed . Find sources: "Evolutionary epistemology" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Evolutionary biology Darwin's finches by John Gould Index Introduction Main Outline Glossary Evidence History Processes and outcomes Population genetics Quantitative genetics Variation Diversity Mutation Natural selection Adaptation Polymorphism Genetic drift Gene flow Speciation Adaptive radiation Cooperation Coevolution Coextinction Contingency Divergence Convergence Parallel evolution Extinction Natural history Origin of life Common descent History of life Timeline of evolution Human evolution Recent human evolution Phylogeny Biodiversity Biogeography Classification Evolutionary taxonomy Cladistics Transitional fossil Extinction event History of evolutionary theory Overview Scientific Revolution Before Darwin Darwin Origin of Species Before synthesis Modern synthesis Molecular evolution Evo-devo Current research History of speciation History of paleontology ( timeline ) Fields and applications Applications of evolution Biosocial criminology Ecological genetics Evolutionary aesthetics Evolutionary anthropology Evolutionary ecology Evolutionary economics Evolutionary epistemology Evolutionary ethics Evolutionary game theory Evolutionary linguistics Evolutionary medicine Evolutionary neuroscience Evolutionary physiology Evolutionary psychology Experimental evolution Invasion genetics Island biogeography Phylogenetics Paleontology Selective breeding Speciation experiments Sociobiology Systematics Universal Darwinism Social implications Eugenics Evolution as fact and theory Dysgenics Social effects Creation–evolution controversy Theistic evolution Objections to evolution Level of support Nature-nurture controversy Evolutionary biology portal Category v t e Part of a series on Epistemology Outline Category Schools Coherentism Contextualism Dogmatism Empiricism Fallibilism Fideism Foundationalism Infallibilism Infinitism Naturalism Perspectivism Pragmatism Rationalism Relativism Skepticism Solipsism Structuralism Concepts Action Analytic–synthetic distinction A priori and a posteriori Belief Credence Certainty Data Experience Information Justification Induction Knowledge Meaning Rationality Reason Truth Wisdom Domains Applied epistemology Evolutionary epistemology Formal epistemology Historical epistemology Metaepistemology Social epistemology Virtue epistemology Epistemologists Aristotle Sextus Empiricus Edmund Gettier Wang Yangming René Descartes David Hume Immanuel Kant W. V. O. Quine more... Related fields Epistemic cognition Epistemic logic Philosophy of perception Philosophy of science v t e Evolutionary epistemology refers to three distinct topics: (1) the biological evolution of cognitive mechanisms in animals and humans, (2) a theory that knowledge itself evolves by natural selection , and (3) the study of the historical discovery of new abstract entities such as abstract number or abstract value that necessarily precede the individual acquisition and usage of such abstractions. As a branch of inquiry in epistemology , evolutionary epistemology lies at the crossroads of philosophy and evolutionary biology . [ 1 ] Cognition in biological evolution [ edit ] Evolutionary epistemology can refer to a branch of inquiry in epistemology that applies the concepts of biological evolution to the growth of animal and human cognition. It argues that the mind is in part genetically determined and that its structure and function reflect adaptation , a nonteleological process of interaction between the organism and its environment. [ citation needed ] A cognitive trait tending to increase inclusive fitness in a given population should therefore grow more common over time, and a trait tending to prevent its carriers from passing on their genes should show up less and less frequently. Growth of knowledge [ edit ] See also: Growth of knowledge Evolutionary epistemology can also refer to a theory that applies the concepts of biological evolution to the growth of human knowledge, and argues that units of knowledge themselves, particularly scientific theories , evolve according to selection. In this case, a theory—like the germ theory of disease—becomes more or less credible according to changes in the body of knowledge surrounding it. One of the hallmarks of evolutionary epistemology is the notion that empirical testing alone does not justify the pragmatic value of scientific theories, but rather that social and methodological processes select those theories with the closest "fit" to a given problem. The mere fact that a theory has survived the most rigorous empirical tests available does not, in the calculus of probability, predict its ability to survive future testing. Karl Popper used Newtonian physics as an example of a body of theories so thoroughly confirmed by testing as to be considered unassailable, but which were nevertheless overturned by Einstein's insights into the nature of space-time . For the evolutionary epistemologist, all theories are true only provisionally, regardless of the degree of empirical testing they have survived. [ 2 ] Process of discovering new abstract entities [ edit ] Evolutionary epistemology can also refer to the opposite of (onto)genetic epistemology, namely phylogenetic epistemology as the historical discovery and reification of abstractions that necessarily precedes the learning of such abstractions by individuals. [ citation needed ] Jean Piaget dismissed this possibility, stating The fundamental hypothesis of genetic epistemology is that there is a parallelism between the progress made in the logical and rational organization of knowledge and the corresponding formative psychological processes. Well, now, if that is our hypothesis, what will be our field of study? Of course the most fruitful, most obvious field of study would be reconstituting human history: the history of human thinking in prehistoric man. Unfortunately, we are not very well informed about the psychology of Neanderthal man or about the psychology of Homo siniensis of Teilhard de Chardin . Since this field of biogenesis is not available to us, we shall do as biologists do and turn to ontogenesis. Nothing could be more accessible to study than the ontogenesis of these notions. There are children all around us." [ 3 ] Piaget was mistaken in so quickly dismissing the study of phylogenetic epistemology, as there is much historical data available about the origins and evolution of the various notational systems that reify different kinds of abstract entity. [ citation needed ] Karl Popper gave its first comprehensive treatment in his 1970 article "Sketch of an Evolutionary Epistemology", [ 4 ] after Donald T. Campbell had coined the phrase in a letter to Popper in 1963. [ 5 ] Campbell wrote on evolutionary epistemology in 1974; [ 6 ] Piaget alluded to it in 1968 [ 3 ] and described the concept as one of five possible theories in The Origins of Intelligence in Children (1936). [ 7 ] Criticism [ edit ] In the scheme of K. Popper , the problem with which the process begins is not defined, making it impossible to predict the outcome to which the cycle of knowledge will lead. 1 /sub> → TT → EE → P sub>2 /sub>"}},"i":0}}]}'>P 1 → TT → EE → P 2 A problem (P 1 ) gives rise to attempts to solve it by tentative theories (TT). These are submitted to a critical process of error elimination (EE). The errors which we detect give rise to new problems (P 2 ). [ 8 ] Additionally, the "specifically human language" is not included in the operation of the scheme. If "All organisms are problem solvers: problems arise with the emergence of life", then death is the absolute problem that creates various derivatives (P 1,2,...,n ), which are overcome by the evolution of life and knowledge. If language is included in the operation of the scheme, then the issue of qualitative transitions in knowledge is addressed, where new levels of problems become accessible only with the presence of a new language. Just as the world of Planck units is described only with the language of Quantum mechanics , and not by correcting errors in Classical mechanics , which is not reflected in Popper's scheme. The proposed scheme involving language: [ 9 ] 1 /sub> → P sub>1 /sub> → TT → EE → L sub>2 /sub> → P sub>2 /sub>"}},"i":0}}]}'>L 1 → P 1 → TT → EE → L 2 → P 2 Where L 1 is the language that allows one to see the problem; L 2 is the new language that allows one to see new spaces of problems. See also [ edit ] Behind the Mirror: A Search for a Natural History of Human Knowledge , also known as Die Rückseite des Spiegels, Versuch einer Naturgeschichte menschlichen Erkennens – 1973 philosophy book by Konrad Lorenz Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Evolutionary philosophy – Branch of philosophy of science Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Evolutionary psychology – Branch of psychology Memetics – Study of self-replicating units of culture Multiple discovery – Hypothesis about scientific discoveries and inventions Philosophy of biology – Subfield of philosophy of science Universal Darwinism – Application of Darwinian theory to other fields Other people [ edit ] Peter Carruthers – American philosopher (born 1952) Vittorio Guidano – Italian neuropsychiatrist David Hull – American philosopher Konrad Lorenz – Austrian zoologist (1903–1989) Henry Plotkin – British psychologist (1940–2021) Rupert Riedl – Austrian zoologist Stephen Toulmin – English philosopher (1922–2009) Gerhard Vollmer – German physicist and philosopher (born 1943) Franz M. Wuketits – Austrian biologist (1955–2018) References [ edit ] ↑ "Evolutionary Epistemology" . Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Retrieved 30 June 2020 . ↑ Popper, 1972. [ page needed ] 1 2 Piaget, 1970, p. 13. ↑ Popper, 1972, chap. 2, sect. 16. ↑ Campbell, 1963. ↑ Schilpp, 1974, pp. 412–463. ↑ See p. 14ff . ↑ Popper (1985). Evolutionary Epistemology . Springer. pp. 395– 413. ↑ Wasielewski (2023). "The Missing Element in Popper's Evolutionary Epistemology" . Borderless Philosophy (6): 218– 230. Sources [ edit ] Campbell, Donald T. (1963). Letter to Karl Popper, Popper archive 'Karl-Popper-Sammlung', University of Klagenfurt, box 282, folder 12; see Hans-Joachim Niemann , "Popper, Darwin and Biology", in G. Franco (ed.) Handbuch Karl Popper , Springer Nature 2019, 359–380. Harms, William F. (2004). Information and Meaning in Evolutionary Processes . Cambridge Studies in Philosophy and Biology. New York: Cambridge University Press. Alfred Holl ; Dominique Maydt: Epistemological foundations of requirements engineering. In: Erkollar, Alptekin (ed.): Enterprise and business management. A handbook for educators, consulters and practitioners. Marburg: Tectum 2007, p. 31-58, ISBN 978-3-8288-9282-8. Piaget, Jean (1970). Genetic Epistemology . Woodbridge lectures delivered at Columbia University in October of 1968. Translated by Eleanor Duckworth. New York: Columbia University Press. Popper, Karl R. (1972). Objective Knowledge, An Evolutionary Approach . New York: Oxford University Press. Riedl, Rupert (1984). Biology of Knowledge: The Evolutionary Basis of Reason . Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley Sons. Schilpp, P. A. (ed.) (1974). The Philosophy of Karl R. Popper . LaSalle, IL: Open Court. See Campbell's essay, "Evolutionary Epistemology" on pp. 412–463. Toulmin, Stephen (1972). Human Understanding, Volume 1: The Collective Use and Evolution of Concepts . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. External links [ edit ] Bradie, Michael; Harms, William (2008-01-04). "Evolutionary Epistemology" . In Zalta, Edward N. (ed.). Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . ISSN 1095-5054 . OCLC 429049174 . Evolutionary epistemology at PhilPapers Evolutionary epistemology at the Indiana Philosophy Ontology Project Gontier, N. "Evolutionary epistemology" . In Fieser, James; Dowden, Bradley (eds.). Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy . ISSN 2161-0002 . OCLC 37741658 . Links on Evolutionary Theory and Memetics from Principia Cybernetica Web Selection Theory Bibliography by Gary A. Cziko and Donald T. Campbell v t e Epistemology Epistemologists William Alston Aquinas Aristotle Robert Audi Augustine A. J. Ayer George Berkeley Berlin Circle Laurence BonJour Gilles Deleuze Keith DeRose René Descartes John Dewey Fred Dretske Edmund Gettier Alvin Goldman Nelson Goodman Paul Grice Anil Gupta Susan Haack David Hume Immanuel Kant Søren Kierkegaard Peter Klein Saul Kripke Hilary Kornblith David Lewis John Locke G. E. Moore John McDowell Robert Nozick Alvin Plantinga Plato Duncan Pritchard James Pryor Hilary Putnam W. V. O. Quine Thomas Reid Bertrand Russell Gilbert Ryle Wilfrid Sellars Susanna Siegel Ernest Sosa P. F. Strawson Baruch Spinoza Timothy Williamson Ludwig Wittgenstein Nicholas Wolterstorff Vienna Circle more... Theories Coherentism Constructivism Contextualism Empiricism Evolutionary epistemology Fallibilism Feminist epistemology Fideism Foundationalism Hauntology Holism Infinitism Innatism Naïve realism Naturalized epistemology Phenomenalism Positivism Rationalism Reductionism Reliabilism Representational realism Skepticism Transcendental idealism Concepts A priori knowledge A posteriori knowledge Analysis Analytic–synthetic distinction Belief Certainty Common sense Descriptive knowledge Exploratory thought Epistemic injustice Epistemic virtue Gettier problem Induction Internalism and externalism Justification Knowledge Meta Objectivity Privileged access Problem of induction Problem of other minds Perception Procedural knowledge Proposition Regress argument Simplicity Truth Uncertainty Worldview Related articles Faith and rationality Formal epistemology Metaepistemology Philosophy of perception Philosophy of science Social epistemology Virtue epistemology Wikipedia Category Outline Portal WikiProject Stubs Discussion v t e Philosophy of biology Themes Ethics Eugenics Dysgenics Kin selection Naturalism Reductionism Holism Emergence Evolutionary taxonomy Evolution Adaptationism Alternatives to Darwinian evolution Catastrophism Lamarckism Orthogenesis Mutationism Structuralism Spandrel Theistic Vitalism Darwinism Evolutionary epistemology Teleology Tree of life Philosophers of biology John Beatty Lindley Darden Daniel Dennett John Dupré Carla Fehr Marjorie Grene Peter Godfrey-Smith James R. Griesemer Paul E. Griffiths David Hull Hans Jonas Philip Kitcher Tim Lewens Helen Longino Jane Maienschein Roberta Millstein Sandra Mitchell Susan Oyama Alex Rosenberg Michael Ruse Sahotra Sarkar Elliott Sober Kim Sterelny Alfred I. Tauber Francisco Varela Gerard Verschuuren William C. Wimsatt Biologists Francisco J. Ayala Patrick Bateson Charles Darwin Richard Dawkins Jared Diamond Michael Ghiselin François Jacob Stephen Jay Gould Richard Lewontin Konrad Lorenz Humberto Maturana Ernst Mayr Jacques Monod Denis Noble Joan Roughgarden Rolf Sattler John Maynard Smith E. O. Wilson Jonas Salk Related Philosophy of mind History of biology v t e Evolutionary psychology History Evolutionary thought Theoretical foundations Adaptationism Cognitive revolution Cognitivism Gene selection theory Modern synthesis Criticism Evolutionary processes Acquired characteristics Adaptations Altruism Cheating Hamiltonian spite Reciprocal Baldwin effect By-products Evolutionarily stable strategy Exaptation Fitness Inclusive Kin selection Inbreeding avoidance Kin recognition Parental investment Parent–offspring conflict Mismatch Natural selection Sexual selection Costly signaling Male / female intrasexual competition Mate choice Sexual dimorphism Social selection Species-typical behavior Areas Cognition / Emotion Affect Display Display rules Facial expression Behavioral modernity Cognitive module / modularity of mind Adaptive unconscious / Unconscious cognition Automatic and controlled processes Cognitive specialization Computational theory of mind Domain generality Domain specificity / learning Dual process theory Cognitive tradeoff hypothesis Evolution of the brain Evolution of nervous systems Fight-or-flight response Arachnophobia Basophobia Ophidiophobia Folk biology / taxonomy Folk psychology / theory of mind Intelligence Flynn effect Wason selection task Motor control / skill Multitasking Numerical cognition Number sense Approximate number system Parallel individuation system Sleep Visual perception Color vision Eye Naïve physics Culture Aesthetics Literary criticism Musicology Anthropology Biological Crime Language Origin Psychology Speech Morality Moral foundations Religion Origin Social contagion Behavioral contagion Emotional contagion Epidemiology of representations Universals Development Attachment Bonding Biology Affectional / maternal / paternal bond Caregiver deprivation Childhood attachment Cinderella effect Cognitive development Education Neuronal recycling hypothesis Science of reading Language acquisition Personality development Socialization Human factors / mental health Cognitive ergonomics Computer-mediated communication Engineering psychology Human–computer interaction Media naturalness theory Neuroergonomics Depression Digital media use and mental health Hypophobia Imprinted brain hypothesis Mind-blindness Psychological effects of Internet use Rank theory of depression Schizophrenia Screen time Smartphones and pedestrian safety Social aspects of television Societal effects of cars Distracted driving Lead–crime hypothesis Mobile phones and driving safety Texting while driving Sex Activity Adult attachment Age disparity Arousal Concealed ovulation Coolidge effect Desire Fantasy Hormonal motivation Incest taboo Westermarck effect Jealousy Mate guarding Mating preferences Mating strategies Orientation Ovulatory shift hypothesis Pair bond Romantic love Physical / Sexual attraction Sexuality / male / female Sexy son hypothesis Sex differences Aggression Autism Cognition Crime Division of labour Emotional intelligence Empathising–systemising theory Gender role Intelligence Memory Mental health Narcissism Neuroscience Schizophrenia Substance abuse Suicide Variability hypothesis Related subjects Academic disciplines Behavioral / evolutionary economics Behavioral epigenetics / genetics Affective / behavioral / cognitive / evolutionary neuroscience Biocultural anthropology Biolinguistics Biological psychiatry Cognitive ethology Cognitive psychology Cognitive science Comparative psychology Cross-cultural psychology Ethology Evolutionary biology Evolutionary medicine Functional psychology Neuropsychology Philosophy of mind Population genetics Primatology Sociobiology Research topics Animal / comparative cognition Animal communication Animal consciousness Animal culture Animal language Animal navigation Animal training Animal-made art Cognitive bias Emotion g factor in non-humans Great ape language Human–animal communication Number sense Primate cognition Theory of mind Tool use Cultural evolution Evolutionary epistemology Missing heritability problem Unit of selection Coevolution Cultural group selection Dual inheritance theory Fisher's principle Group selection Hologenome theory Lamarckism Population Punctuated equilibrium Recent human evolution Species Species complex Transgenerational epigenetic inheritance Trivers–Willard hypothesis Theoretical positions Cultural selection theory Determinism / indeterminism Biological determinism Connectionism Cultural determinism Environmental determinism Nature versus nurture Psychological nativism Social constructionism Social determinism Standard social science model Functionalism Memetics Multilineal evolution Neo-Darwinism Neoevolutionism Sociocultural evoluti