Evolution - Wikipedia Jump to content From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Change in the heritable traits of populations This article is about evolution in biology. For related articles, see Outline of evolution . For other uses, see Evolution (disambiguation) . For a more accessible and less technical introduction to this topic, see Introduction to evolution . Part of the Biology series on Evolution Mechanisms and processes Adaptation Evolution Genetic drift Gene flow History of life Maladaptation Mutation Natural selection Neutral theory Population genetics Speciation Research and history Introduction Evidence Evolutionary history of life History Level of support Modern synthesis Objections / Controversy Social effect Theory and fact Evolutionary biology fields Cladistics Ecological genetics Evolutionary anthropology Evolutionary development Evolutionary psychology Molecular evolution Phylogenetics Population genetics Systematics Evolution portal v t e Evolution is the change in the heritable characteristics of biological populations over successive generations. [ 1 ] [ 2 ] It occurs when evolutionary processes such as genetic drift and natural selection act on genetic variation, resulting in certain characteristics becoming more or less common within a population over successive generations. [ 3 ] The process of evolution has given rise to biodiversity at every level of biological organisation . [ 4 ] [ 5 ] The scientific theory of evolution by natural selection was conceived independently by two British naturalists, Charles Darwin and Alfred Russel Wallace , in the mid-19th century as an explanation for why organisms are adapted to their physical and biological environments. The theory was first set out in detail in Darwin's book On the Origin of Species . [ 6 ] Evolution by natural selection is established by observable facts about living organisms: (1) more offspring are often produced than can possibly survive; (2) traits vary among individuals with respect to their morphology , physiology , and behaviour; (3) different traits confer different rates of survival and reproduction (differential fitness ); and (4) traits can be passed from generation to generation ( heritability of fitness). [ 7 ] In successive generations, members of a population are therefore more likely to be replaced by the offspring of parents with favourable characteristics for that environment. In the early 20th century, competing ideas of evolution were refuted and evolution was combined with Mendelian inheritance and population genetics to give rise to modern evolutionary theory. [ 8 ] In this synthesis the basis for heredity is in DNA molecules that pass information from generation to generation. The processes that change DNA in a population include natural selection, genetic drift, mutation , and gene flow . [ 3 ] All life on Earth—including humanity —shares a last universal common ancestor (LUCA), [ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] which lived approximately 3.5–3.8 billion years ago. [ 12 ] The fossil record includes a progression from early biogenic graphite [ 13 ] to microbial mat fossils [ 14 ] [ 15 ] [ 16 ] to fossilised multicellular organisms . Existing patterns of biodiversity have been shaped by repeated formations of new species ( speciation ), changes within species ( anagenesis ), and loss of species ( extinction ) throughout the evolutionary history of life on Earth. [ 17 ] Morphological and biochemical traits tend to be more similar among species that share a more recent common ancestor , which historically was used to reconstruct phylogenetic trees , although direct comparison of genetic sequences is a more common method today. [ 18 ] [ 19 ] Evolutionary biologists have continued to study various aspects of evolution by forming and testing hypotheses as well as constructing theories based on evidence from the field or laboratory and on data generated by the methods of mathematical and theoretical biology . Their discoveries have influenced not just the development of biology but also other fields including agriculture, medicine, and computer science . [ 20 ] Heredity Further information: Introduction to genetics , Genetics , and Heredity DNA structure. Bases are in the centre, surrounded by phosphate–sugar chains in a double helix . Evolution in organisms occurs through changes in heritable characteristics—the inherited characteristics of an organism. In humans, for example, eye colour is an inherited characteristic and an individual might inherit the "brown-eye trait" from one of their parents. [ 21 ] Inherited traits are controlled by genes and the complete set of genes within an organism's genome (genetic material) is called its genotype . [ 22 ] The complete set of observable traits that make up the structure and behaviour of an organism is called its phenotype . Some of these traits come from the interaction of its genotype with the environment while others are neutral. [ 23 ] Some observable characteristics are not inherited. For example, suntanned skin comes from the interaction between a person's genotype and sunlight; thus, suntans are not passed on to people's children. The phenotype is the ability of the skin to tan when exposed to sunlight. However, some people tan more easily than others, due to differences in genotypic variation; a striking example are people with the inherited trait of albinism , who do not tan at all and are very sensitive to sunburn . [ 24 ] Heritable characteristics are passed from one generation to the next via DNA , a molecule that encodes genetic information. [ 22 ] DNA is a long biopolymer composed of four types of bases. The sequence of bases along a particular DNA molecule specifies the genetic information, in a manner similar to a sequence of letters spelling out a sentence. Before a cell divides, the DNA is copied, so that each of the resulting two cells will inherit the DNA sequence. Portions of a DNA molecule that specify a single functional unit are called genes; different genes have different sequences of bases. Within cells, each long strand of DNA is called a chromosome . The specific location of a DNA sequence within a chromosome is known as a locus . If the DNA sequence at a locus varies between individuals, the different forms of this sequence are called alleles. DNA sequences can change through mutations, producing new alleles. If a mutation occurs within a gene, the new allele may affect the trait that the gene controls, altering the phenotype of the organism. [ 25 ] However, while this simple correspondence between an allele and a trait works in some cases, most traits are influenced by multiple genes in a quantitative or epistatic manner. [ 26 ] [ 27 ] Sources of variation Main article: Genetic variation Further information: Genetic diversity and Population genetics White peppered moth Black morph in peppered moth evolution Evolution can occur if there is genetic variation within a population. Variation comes from mutations in the genome, reshuffling of genes through sexual reproduction and migration between populations ( gene flow ). Despite the constant introduction of new variation through mutation and gene flow, most of the genome of a species is very similar among all individuals of that species. [ 28 ] However, discoveries in the field of evolutionary developmental biology have demonstrated that even relatively small differences in genotype can lead to dramatic differences in phenotype both within and between species. An individual organism's phenotype results from both its genotype and the influence of the environment it has lived in. [ 27 ] The modern evolutionary synthesis defines evolution as the change over time in this genetic variation. The frequency of one particular allele will become more or less prevalent relative to other forms of that gene. Variation disappears when a new allele reaches the point of fixation —when it either disappears from the population or replaces the ancestral allele entirely. [ 29 ] Mutation Main article: Mutation Duplication of part of a chromosome Mutations are changes in the DNA sequence of a cell's genome and are the ultimate source of genetic variation in all organisms. [ 30 ] When mutations occur, they may alter the product of a gene , or prevent the gene from functioning, or have no effect. About half of the mutations in the coding regions of protein-coding genes are deleterious — the other half are neutral. A small percentage of the total mutations in this region confer a fitness benefit. [ 31 ] Some of the mutations in other parts of the genome are deleterious but the vast majority are neutral. A few are beneficial. Mutations can involve large sections of a chromosome becoming duplicated (usually by genetic recombination ), which can introduce extra copies of a gene into a genome. [ 32 ] Extra copies of genes are a major source of the raw material needed for new genes to evolve. [ 33 ] This is important because most new genes evolve within gene families from pre-existing genes that share common ancestors. [ 34 ] For example, the human eye uses four genes to make structures that sense light: three for colour vision and one for night vision ; all four are descended from a single ancestral gene. [ 35 ] New genes can be generated from an ancestral gene when a duplicate copy mutates and acquires a new function. This process is easier once a gene has been duplicated because it increases the redundancy of the system; one gene in the pair can acquire a new function while the other copy continues to perform its original function. [ 36 ] [ 37 ] Other types of mutations can even generate entirely new genes from previously noncoding DNA, a phenomenon termed de novo gene birth . [ 38 ] [ 39 ] The generation of new genes can also involve small parts of several genes being duplicated, with these fragments then recombining to form new combinations with new functions ( exon shuffling ). [ 40 ] [ 41 ] When new genes are assembled from shuffling pre-existing parts, domains act as modules with simple independent functions, which can be mixed together to produce new combinations with new and complex functions. [ 42 ] For example, polyketide synthases are large enzymes that make antibiotics ; they contain up to 100 independent domains that each catalyse one step in the overall process, like a step in an assembly line. [ 43 ] One example of mutation is wild boar piglets. They are camouflage coloured and show a characteristic pattern of dark and light longitudinal stripes. However, mutations in the melanocortin 1 receptor ( MC1R ) disrupt the pattern. The majority of pig breeds carry MC1R mutations disrupting wild-type colour and different mutations causing dominant black colouring. [ 44 ] Sex and recombination Further information: Sexual reproduction , Genetic recombination , and Evolution of sexual reproduction In asexual organisms, genes are inherited together, or linked , as they cannot mix with genes of other organisms during reproduction. In contrast, the offspring of sexual organisms contain random mixtures of their parents' chromosomes that are produced through independent assortment. In a related process called homologous recombination , sexual organisms exchange DNA between two matching chromosomes. [ 45 ] Recombination and reassortment do not alter allele frequencies, but instead change which alleles are associated with each other, producing offspring with new combinations of alleles. [ 46 ] Sex usually increases genetic variation and may increase the rate of evolution. [ 47 ] [ 48 ] The two-fold cost of sex was first described by John Maynard Smith . [ 49 ] The first cost is that in sexually dimorphic species only one of the two sexes can bear young. This cost does not apply to hermaphroditic species, like most plants and many invertebrates . The second cost is that any individual who reproduces sexually can only pass on 50% of its genes to any individual offspring, with even less passed on as each new generation passes. [ 50 ] Yet sexual reproduction is the more common means of reproduction among eukaryotes and multicellular organisms. The Red Queen hypothesis has been used to explain the significance of sexual reproduction as a means to enable continual evolution and adaptation in response to coevolution with other species in an ever-changing environment. [ 50 ] [ 51 ] [ 52 ] [ 53 ] Another hypothesis is that sexual reproduction is primarily an adaptation for promoting accurate recombinational repair of damage in germline DNA, and that increased diversity is a byproduct of this process that may sometimes be adaptively beneficial. [ 54 ] [ 55 ] Gene flow Further information: Gene flow Gene flow is the exchange of genes between populations and between species. [ 56 ] It can therefore be a source of variation that is new to a population or to a species. Gene flow can be caused by the movement of individuals between separate populations of organisms, as might be caused by the movement of mice between inland and coastal populations, or the movement of pollen between heavy-metal-tolerant and heavy-metal-sensitive populations of grasses. Gene transfer between species includes the formation of hybrid organisms and horizontal gene transfer . Horizontal gene transfer is the transfer of genetic material from one organism to another organism that is not its offspring; this is most common among bacteria. [ 57 ] In medicine, this contributes to the spread of antibiotic resistance , as when one bacteria acquires resistance genes it can rapidly transfer them to other species. [ 58 ] Horizontal transfer of genes from bacteria to eukaryotes such as the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae and the adzuki bean weevil Callosobruchus chinensis has occurred. [ 59 ] [ 60 ] An example of larger-scale transfers are the eukaryotic bdelloid rotifers , which have received a range of genes from bacteria, fungi and plants. [ 61 ] Viruses can also carry DNA between organisms, allowing transfer of genes even across biological domains . [ 62 ] Large-scale gene transfer has also occurred between the ancestors of eukaryotic cells and bacteria, during the acquisition of chloroplasts and mitochondria . It is possible that eukaryotes themselves originated from horizontal gene transfers between bacteria and archaea . [ 63 ] Epigenetics Further information: Epigenetics Some heritable changes cannot be explained by changes to the sequence of nucleotides in the DNA. These phenomena are classed as epigenetic inheritance systems. [ 64 ] DNA methylation marking chromatin , self-sustaining metabolic loops, gene silencing by RNA interference and the three-dimensional conformation of proteins (such as prions ) are areas where epigenetic inheritance systems have been discovered at the organismic level. [ 65 ] Developmental biologists suggest that complex interactions in genetic networks and communication among cells can lead to heritable variations that may underlay some of the mechanics in developmental plasticity and canalisation . [ 66 ] Heritability may also occur at even larger scales. For example, ecological inheritance through the process of niche construction is defined by the regular and repeated activities of organisms in their environment. This generates a legacy of effects that modify and feed back into the selection regime of subsequent generations. [ 67 ] Other examples of heritability in evolution that are not under the direct control of genes include the inheritance of cultural traits and symbiogenesis . [ 68 ] [ 69 ] Evolutionary forces Mutation followed by natural selection results in a population with darker colouration. From a neo-Darwinian perspective, evolution occurs when there are changes in the frequencies of alleles within a population of interbreeding organisms, [ 70 ] for example, the allele for black colour in a population of moths becoming more common. Mechanisms that can lead to changes in allele frequencies include natural selection, genetic drift, and mutation bias. Natural selection Main article: Natural selection See also: Dollo's law of irreversibility Evolution by natural selection is the process by which traits that enhance survival and reproduction become more common in successive generations of a population. It embodies three principles: [ 7 ] Variation exists within populations of organisms with respect to morphology, physiology and behaviour (phenotypic variation). Different traits confer different rates of survival and reproduction (differential fitness). These traits can be passed from generation to generation (heritability of fitness). More offspring are produced than can possibly survive, and these conditions produce competition between organisms for survival and reproduction. Consequently, organisms with traits that give them an advantage over their competitors are more likely to pass on their traits to the next generation than those with traits that do not confer an advantage. [ 71 ] This teleonomy is the quality whereby the process of natural selection creates and preserves traits that are seemingly fitted for the functional roles they perform. [ 72 ] Consequences of selection include nonrandom mating [ 73 ] and genetic hitchhiking . The central concept of natural selection is the evolutionary fitness of an organism. [ 74 ] Fitness is measured by an organism's ability to survive and reproduce, which determines the size of its genetic contribution to the next generation. [ 74 ] However, fitness is not the same as the total number of offspring: instead fitness is indicated by the proportion of subsequent generations that carry an organism's genes. [ 75 ] For example, if an organism could survive well and reproduce rapidly, but its offspring were all too small and weak to survive, this organism would make little genetic contribution to future generations and would thus have low fitness. [ 74 ] If an allele increases fitness more than the other alleles of that gene, then with each generation this allele has a higher probability of becoming common within the population. These traits are said to be selected for . Examples of traits that can increase fitness are enhanced survival and increased fecundity . Conversely, the lower fitness caused by having a less beneficial or deleterious allele results in this allele likely becoming rarer—they are selected against . [ 76 ] Importantly, the fitness of an allele is not a fixed characteristic; if the environment changes, previously neutral or harmful traits may become beneficial and previously beneficial traits become harmful. [ 25 ] However, even if the direction of selection does reverse in this way, traits that were lost in the past may not re-evolve in an identical form. [ 77 ] [ 78 ] However, a re-activation of dormant genes, as long as they have not been eliminated from the genome and were only suppressed perhaps for hundreds of generations, can lead to the re-occurrence of traits thought to be lost like hindlegs in dolphins, teeth in chickens, wings in wingless stick insects, tails and additional nipples in humans etc. "Throwbacks" such as these are known as atavisms . [ 79 ] These charts depict the different types of genetic selection. On each graph, the x-axis variable is the type of phenotypic trait and the y-axis variable is the number of organisms. Group A is the original population and Group B is the population after selection. · Graph 1 shows directional selection , in which a single extreme phenotype is favoured. · Graph 2 depicts stabilising selection , where the intermediate phenotype is favoured over the extreme traits. · Graph 3 shows disruptive selection , in which the extreme phenotypes are favoured over the intermediate. Natural selection within a population for a trait that can vary across a range of values, such as height, can be categorised into three different types. The first is directional selection , which is a shift in the average value of a trait over time—for example, organisms