Amor fati - Wikipedia Jump to content From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Latin phrase meaning 'love of fate' For other uses, see Amor fati (disambiguation) . Amor fati is a Latin phrase that may be translated as 'love of fate ' or 'love of one's fate'. It is used to describe an attitude in which one sees everything that happens in one's life, including suffering and loss , as necessary. [ 1 ] Amor fati is often associated with what Friedrich Nietzsche called " eternal recurrence ", the idea that everything recurs infinitely over an infinite period of time. From this he developed a desire to be willing to live exactly the same life over and over for all eternity ("... long for nothing more fervently than this ultimate eternal confirmation and seal"). [ 2 ] Nietzsche [ edit ] The concept of amor fati has been linked to Epictetus . [ 3 ] It has also been linked to the writings of Marcus Aurelius , [ 4 ] who did not use those words (he wrote in Greek , not Latin). [ 5 ] However, it found its most explicit expression in Nietzsche, who made love of fate central to his philosophy. In "Why I Am So Clever" ( Ecce Homo , section 10), he writes: My formula for greatness in a human being is amor fati : that one wants nothing to be different, not forward, not backward, not in all eternity. Not merely bear what is necessary, still less conceal it—all idealism is mendacity in the face of what is necessary—but love it. [ 6 ] The phrase is used elsewhere in Nietzsche's writings and is representative of the general outlook on life that he articulates in aphorism 276 of The Gay Science : I want to learn more and more to see as beautiful what is necessary in things; then I shall be one of those who makes things beautiful. Amor fati : let that be my love henceforth! I do not want to wage war against what is ugly. I do not want to accuse; I do not even want to accuse those who accuse. Looking away shall be my only negation. And all in all and on the whole: some day I wish to be only a Yes-sayer. [ 7 ] Nietzsche in this context refers to the "Yes-sayer", not in a political or social sense, but as a person who is capable of uncompromising acceptance of reality per se . R. J. Hollingdale , who translated Thus Spoke Zarathustra into English, argued that Nietzsche's idea of amor fati originated in the Lutheran Pietism of his childhood. [ 8 ] Suffering [ edit ] Nietzsche's love of fate naturally leads him to confront the reality of suffering in a radical way. For to love that which is necessary demands not only that we love the bad along with the good, but that we view the two as inextricably linked. In section 3 of the preface of The Gay Science , he writes: Only great pain is the ultimate liberator of the spirit…. I doubt that such pain makes us "better"; but I know that it makes us more profound. [ 9 ] Nietzsche does not promote suffering as a good in itself, but rather as a precondition for good. A "single moment" of good justifies an eternity of bad, but one extreme cannot have meaning without the other. In The Will to Power he writes: For nothing is self-sufficient, neither in us ourselves nor in things; and if our soul has trembled with happiness and sounded like a harp string just once, all eternity was needed to produce this one event—and in this single moment of affirmation all eternity was called good, redeemed, justified, and affirmed. [ 10 ] Modern development [ edit ] Cyril O'Regan remarked that with "all the bravado about amor fati we sometimes get the impression in reading [Nietzsche] that he is expecting as much our pity as our admiration. Still, the aphorism is powerful, and it is powerful not only because it is scintillating in its expression, but because it is experientially apt." [ 11 ] Albert Camus [ edit ] The French philosopher Albert Camus , in his 1942 essay The Myth of Sisyphus , explores ideas similar to those of Nietzsche. [ 12 ] According to Camus's philosophy of absurdism , the human condition is analogous to the curse of Sisyphus , who in ancient Greek mythology was condemned to eternally repeat the task of pushing a boulder up a hill only to watch it roll back down again. Like Nietzsche, Camus concludes that happiness is only possible when the essential meaninglessness of one's existence is not only acknowledged, but positively affirmed. [ 12 ] In "Return to Tipasa" (1952), Camus writes: What else can I desire than to exclude nothing and to learn how to braid with white thread and black thread a single cord stretched to the breaking-point? [ 13 ] Camus, like Nietzsche, held his embrace of fate to be central to his philosophy and to life itself. Summarizing his general view of life in the above work, Camus further spoke of: "a will to live without rejecting anything of life, which is the virtue I honor most in this world." [ 14 ] See also [ edit ] Agonism – Political theory emphasizing the positive aspects of conflict Destiny – Predetermined course of events Eternal return – Concept of perpetual recurrence of time Fatalism – Philosophical doctrine on the subjugation of all events to fate Nietzschean affirmation – Concept in Friedrich Nietzsche's philosophy Thus Spoke Zarathustra – Philosophical work by Friedrich Nietzsche References [ edit ] ↑ "Amor Fati: The Formula for Human Greatness" . Daily Stoic. 10 October 2017. ↑ Nietzsche, Friedrich. The Gay Science . IV, §341. ↑ Epictetus . Arrian (ed.). Enchiridion . Ch. VIII. Do not seek for things to happen the way you want them to; rather, wish that what happens happen the way it happens: then you will be happy — as quoted in Hadot, Pierre (1998). The Inner Citadel: The Meditations of Marcus Aurelius . Translated by Chase, Michael. Harvard University Press. p. 143. ISBN 9780674461710 . ↑ Aurelius, Marcus . Meditations . IV.23. All that is in accord with you is in accord with me, O World! Nothing which occurs at the right time for you comes too soon or too late for me. All that your seasons produce, O Nature, is fruit for me. It is from you that all things come: all things are within you, and all things move toward you. — as quoted in Hadot, Pierre (1998). The Inner Citadel: The Meditations of Marcus Aurelius . Translated by Chase, Michael. Harvard University Press. p. 143. ISBN 9780674461710 . ↑ "An Interview with the Master: Robert Greene on Stoicism" . Daily Stoic. 21 September 2016. ↑ Nietzsche, Friedrich (1967) [1908]. "Ecce Homo". Basic Writings of Nietzsche . Translated by Kaufmann, Walter. p. 714. ↑ Nietzsche, Friedrich (2010-08-18). The Gay Science: With a Prelude in Rhymes and an Appendix of Songs . Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group. p. 223. ISBN 978-0-307-43417-3 . ↑ Nietzsche, Friedrich (1974). Thus Spoke Zarathustra . Translated by Hollingdale, R. J. Penguin Books Limited. p. 30. ISBN 978-0141904320 . ↑ Leiter, Brian (2015). "Nietzsche's Moral and Political Philosophy". In Zalta, Edward N. (ed.). The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. ↑ Nietzsche, Friedrich (1968). Will to Power . Translated by Kaufman, Walter; Holdingdale, R.J. Vintage Books. §1032. ↑ The Stare of Medusa and the Return Gaze of Christ , 11 October 2018 1 2 Woodward, Ashley (December 2011). "Camus and Nihilism". Sophia . 50 (4): 543– 559. doi : 10.1007/s11841-011-0274-0 . S2CID 170146230 . ↑ Camus, Albert (2008). Oeuvres Completes . Vol. 3. Paris: Bibliotheque de la Pleiade, Editions Gallimard. p. 613. ↑ Camus, Albert (2012-10-31). The Myth of Sisyphus And Other Essays . Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group. p. 203. ISBN 978-0-307-82782-1 . v t e Friedrich Nietzsche Bibliography Books The Birth of Tragedy (1872) Philosophy in the Tragic Age of the Greeks (1873) Untimely Meditations " On the Advantage and Disadvantage of History for Life " (1874) Human, All Too Human (1878) The Dawn of Day (1881) The Gay Science (1882) Thus Spoke Zarathustra (1883–1885) Beyond Good and Evil (1886) On the Genealogy of Morality (1887) The Case of Wagner (1888) Twilight of the Idols (1889) The Antichrist (1895) Ecce Homo (1908) Unfinished: Magnum in parvo The Will to Power Essays " On the Pathos of Truth " (1872) " On Truth and Lies in a Nonmoral Sense " (1873) " Nietzsche contra Wagner " (1895) Poetry Idylls from Messina (1882) " Zarathustra's roundelay " (1883) Dionysian Dithyrambs (1891/1908) Music Hymnus an das Leben (1887) Concepts and philosophy Affirmation Amor fati Apollonian and Dionysian The Four Great Errors Eternal return Faith in the Earth Free will Genealogy (philosophy) God is dead Holy Lie Immaculate perception Last man Master–slave morality Perspectivism Ressentiment Transvaluation of values Tschandala Übermensch Will to power World riddle Legacy Influence and reception Works about Nietzsche The Journal of Nietzsche Studies New Nietzsche Studies Friedrich Nietzsche Prize Library of Friedrich Nietzsche Nietzsche Archive Nietzsche-Haus, Naumburg Nietzsche-Haus, Sils Maria North American Nietzsche Society Vivere pericoloso Related Elisabeth Förster-Nietzsche (sister) Nietzschean Zionism Relationship with Max Stirner Views on women v t e Virtues About virtues Endowment Moral character Nicomachean Ethics Positive psychology Trait theory Virtue ethics Virtue families Bodhipakkhiyā dhammā Brahmavihārās Bushidō Catalogue of Vices and Virtues Civic virtue Emi Omo Eso Epistemic virtues Five virtues Four Cardinal Principles and Eight Virtues Intellectual virtues Moral virtues Nine Noble Virtues Omoluwabi Pāramīs Prussian virtues Scout Law Seven virtues Cardinal Theological Teachings of the Seven Grandfathers Three Treasures Values in Action Inventory of Strengths Yamas Individual virtues Accountability Alertness Altruism Authenticity Calmness Charisma Charity Chastity Chivalry Cleanliness Compassion Conscientiousness Courage Civil Moral Courtesy Diligence Discernment Discipline Duty Empathy Endurance Equanimity Etiquette Faith Faithfulness Fidelity Foresight Forgiveness Frugality Generosity Gentleness Glory Good faith Gratitude Heroism Honesty Honour Hope Hospitality Humanity Humility Impartiality Innocence Insight Integrity Intelligence Emotional Social Judgement Justice Kindness Love Loyalty Magnanimity Magnificence Meekness Mercy Moderation Modesty Nonattachment Patience Patriotism Perspicacity Philanthropy Piety Filial Pity Politeness Prudence Punctuality Religion Renunciation Resilience Respect Reverence Righteous indignation Righteousness Self-control Self-cultivation Self-transcendence Simplicity Sincerity Solidarity Sportsmanship Sympathy Taste Temperance Tranquillity Trust Wisdom Wit Workmanship Chinese De Jing Li Ren Yi Greek Agape Arete Ataraxia Eutrapelia Philotimo Phronesis Sophia Sophrosyne Indian Adhiṭṭhāna Ahimsa Akrodha Aparigraha Ārjava Asteya Brahmacharya Dāna Dhṛti Hrī Karuṇā Kshama Kshanti Mettā Muditā Nishkama Karma Prajñā Samatva Satya Shaucha Sevā Śraddhā / Saddhā Upekṣā Vīrya Latin Auctoritas Caritas Decorum Dignitas Fides Gravitas Humanitas Pietas Virtus Other Ganbaru Giri Sadaqah Seny Sisu Virtù Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Amor_fati oldid=1358841261 " Categories : Latin words and phrases Destiny Philosophy of Friedrich Nietzsche Philosophy of life Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing Catalan-language text Articles containing Italian-language text Search Search Amor fati 25 languages Add topic