History of mathematical notation - Wikipedia Jump to content From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Origin and evolution of the symbols used to write equations and formulas For the book by Florian Cajori, see A History of Mathematical Notations . The history of mathematical notation [ 1 ] covers the introduction, development, and cultural diffusion of mathematical symbols and the conflicts between notational methods that arise during a notation's move to popularity or obsolescence. Mathematical notation [ 2 ] comprises the symbols used to write mathematical equations and formulas . Notation generally implies a set of well-defined representations of quantities and symbols operators. [ 3 ] The history includes Hindu–Arabic numerals , letters from the Roman , Greek , Hebrew , and German alphabets , and a variety of symbols invented by mathematicians over the past several centuries. The historical development of mathematical notation can be divided into three stages: [ 4 ] [ 5 ] Rhetorical stage —where calculations are performed by words and tallies, and no symbols are used. [ 6 ] Syncopated stage —where frequently used operations and quantities are represented by symbolic syntactical abbreviations, such as letters or numerals. During antiquity and the medieval periods, bursts of mathematical creativity were often followed by centuries of stagnation. As the early modern age opened and the worldwide spread of knowledge began, written examples of mathematical developments came to light. Symbolic stage —where comprehensive systems of notation supersede rhetoric. The increasing pace of new mathematical developments, interacting with new scientific discoveries, led to a robust and complete usage of symbols. This began with mathematicians of medieval India and mid-16th century Europe, [ 7 ] and continues through the present day. The more general area of study known as the history of mathematics primarily investigates the origins of discoveries in mathematics. The specific focus of this article is the investigation of mathematical methods and notations of the past. Rhetorical stage [ edit ] See also: Measurement Many areas of mathematics began with the study of real world problems , before the underlying rules and concepts were identified and defined as abstract structures . For example, geometry has its origins in the calculation of distances and areas in the real world; algebra started with methods of solving problems in arithmetic . The earliest mathematical notations emerged from these problems. There can be no doubt that most early peoples who left records knew something of numeration and mechanics and that a few were also acquainted with the elements of land-surveying . In particular, the ancient Egyptians paid attention to geometry and numbers, and the ancient Phoenicians performed practical arithmetic, book-keeping , navigation , and land-surveying. The results attained by these people seem to have been accessible (under certain conditions) to travelers, facilitating dispersal of the methods . It is probable that the knowledge of the Egyptians and Phoenicians was largely the result of observation and measurement , and represented the accumulated experience of many ages. Subsequent studies of mathematics by the Greeks were largely indebted to these previous investigations. Beginning of notation [ edit ] See also: Ancient history , History of ancient numeral systems , and Science in the ancient world Babylonian tablet (c. 1800–1600 BCE), showing an approximation of √ 2 (1 24 51 10 in sexagesimal ) in the context of the Pythagorean theorem for an isosceles triangle . Written mathematics began with numbers expressed as tally marks , with each tally representing a single unit. Numerical symbols consisted probably of strokes or notches cut in wood or stone, which were intelligible across cultures. For example, one notch in a bone represented one animal, person, or object. Numerical notation's distinctive feature—symbols having both local and intrinsic values—implies a state of civilization at the period of its invention. The earliest evidence of written mathematics dates back to the ancient Sumerians and the system of metrology from 3000 BC. From around 2500 BC onwards, the Sumerians wrote multiplication tables on clay tablets and dealt with geometrical exercises and division problems. The earliest traces of Babylonian numerals also date back to this period. [ 8 ] Babylonian mathematics has been reconstructed from more than 400 clay tablets unearthed since the 1850s. [ 9 ] Written in cuneiform , these tablets were inscribed whilst the clay was soft and then baked hard in an oven or by the heat of the sun. Some of these appear to be graded homework. [ citation needed ] The majority of Mesopotamian clay tablets date from 1800 to 1600 BC, and cover topics which include fractions, algebra, quadratic and cubic equations, and the calculation of regular numbers , reciprocals , and pairs . [ 10 ] The tablets also include multiplication tables and methods for solving linear and quadratic equations . The Babylonian tablet YBC 7289 gives an approximation of √ 2 that is accurate to an equivalent of six decimal places. Babylonian mathematics were written using a sexagesimal (base-60) numeral system . From this derives the modern-day usage of 60 seconds in a minute, 60 minutes in an hour, and 360 (60 × 6) degrees in a circle, as well as the use of minutes and seconds of arc to denote fractions of a degree. Babylonian advances in mathematics were facilitated by the fact that 60 has many divisors: the reciprocal of any integer which is a multiple of divisors of 60 has a finite expansion in base 60. (In decimal arithmetic, only reciprocals of multiples of 2 and 5 have finite decimal expansions.) Also, unlike the Egyptians, Greeks, and Romans, the Babylonians had a true place-value system, where digits written in the left column represented larger values, much as in the decimal system. They lacked, however, an equivalent of the decimal point, and so the place value of a symbol often had to be inferred from the context. Initially, the Mesopotamians had symbols for each power of ten. [ 11 ] Later, they wrote numbers in almost exactly the same way as in modern times. Instead of using unique symbols for each power of ten, they wrote only the coefficients of each power of ten, with each digit separated by only a space. By the time of Alexander the Great , they had created a symbol that represented zero and was a placeholder. Rhetorical algebra was first developed by the ancient Babylonians and remained dominant up to the 16th century. In this system, equations are written in full sentences. For example, the rhetorical form of x + 1 = 2 {\displaystyle x+1=2} is "The thing plus one equals two" or possibly "The thing plus 1 equals 2". [ citation needed ] The ancient Egyptians numerated by hieroglyphics . [ 12 ] [ 13 ] Egyptian mathematics had symbols for one, ten, one hundred, one thousand, ten thousand, one hundred thousand, and one million. Smaller digits were placed on the left of the number, as they are in Hindu–Arabic numerals. Later, the Egyptians used hieratic instead of hieroglyphic script to show numbers. Hieratic was more like cursive and replaced several groups of symbols with individual ones. For example, the four vertical lines used to represent the number 'four' were replaced by a single horizontal line. This is found in the Rhind Mathematical Papyrus (c. 2000–1800 BC) and the Moscow Mathematical Papyrus (c. 1890 BC). The system the Egyptians used was discovered and modified by many other civilizations in the Mediterranean. The Egyptians also had symbols for basic operations: legs going forward represented addition, and legs walking backward to represent subtraction. The peoples with whom the Greeks of Asia Minor (amongst whom notation in western history begins) were likely to have come into frequent contact were those inhabiting the eastern littoral of the Mediterranean; Greek tradition uniformly assigned the special development of geometry to the Egyptians, and the science of numbers to either the Egyptians or the Phoenicians. Syncopated stage [ edit ] Death of Archimedes (1815) by Thomas Degeorge . The last words attributed to Archimedes are " Do not disturb my circles ", a reference to the circles in the mathematical drawing that he was studying when disturbed by the Roman soldier. See also: Fundamental theorem of arithmetic and Naive set theory The history of mathematics cannot with certainty be traced back to any school or period before that of the Ionian Greeks. Still, the subsequent history may be divided into periods, the distinctions between which are tolerably well-marked. Greek mathematics , which originated with the study of geometry, tended to be deductive and scientific from its commencement. Since the fourth century AD, Pythagoras has commonly been given credit for discovering the Pythagorean theorem , a theorem in geometry that states that in a right-angled triangle the area of the square on the hypotenuse (the side opposite the right angle) is equal to the sum of the areas of the squares of the other two sides. [ 14 ] However, this geometric relationship appears in a few earlier ancient mathematical texts (albeit not as a formalized theorem), notably Plimpton 322 , a Babylonian tablet of mathematics from around 1900 BC. The study of mathematics as a subject in its own right began in the 6th century BC with the Pythagoreans , who coined the term "mathematics" from the ancient Greek mathema (μάθημα), meaning "subject of instruction". [ 15 ] Plato 's influence was especially strong in mathematics and the sciences. He helped to distinguish between pure and applied mathematics by widening the gap between "arithmetic" (now called number theory ) and "logistic" (now called arithmetic ). Greek mathematics greatly refined the methods (especially through the introduction of deductive reasoning and mathematical rigor in proofs ) and expanded the subject matter of mathematics. [ 16 ] Aristotle is credited with what later would be called the law of excluded middle . Abstract or pure mathematics [ 17 ] deals with concepts like magnitude and quantity without regard to any practical application or situation, and includes arithmetic and geometry . In contrast, in mixed or applied mathematics , mathematical properties and relationships are applied to real-world objects to model laws of physics, for example in hydrostatics , optics , and navigation . [ 17 ] Archimedes is generally considered to be the greatest mathematician of antiquity and one of the greatest of all time. [ 18 ] [ 19 ] He used the method of exhaustion to calculate the area under the arc of a parabola with the summation of an infinite series , and gave a remarkably accurate approximation of pi . [ 20 ] He also defined the spiral bearing his name, formulae for the volumes of surfaces of revolution , and an ingenious system for expressing very large numbers. Propositions 31, 32, and 33 in the ninth book of Euclid's Elements (volume 2 of the manuscript, sheets 207–208 recto.) The ancient Greeks made steps in the abstraction of geometry. Euclid's Elements (c. 300 BC) is the earliest extant documentation of the axioms of plane geometry—though Proclus tells of an earlier axiomatisation by Hippocrates of Chios [ 21 ] —and is one of the oldest extant Greek mathematical treatises. Consisting of thirteen books, it collects theorems proven by other mathematicians, supplemented by some original work. The document is a successful collection of definitions, postulates (axioms), propositions (theorems and constructions), and mathematical proofs of the propositions, and covers topics such as Euclidean geometry, geometric algebra, elementary number theory, and the ancient Greek version of algebraic systems. The first theorem given in the text, Euclid's lemma , captures a fundamental property of prime numbers . The text was ubiquitous in the quadrivium and was instrumental in the development of logic, mathematics, and science. Autolycus ' On the Moving Sphere is another ancient mathematical manuscript of the time. [ citation needed ] The next phase of notation for algebra was syncopated algebra, in which some symbolism is used, but which does not contain all of the characteristics of symbolic algebra. For instance, there may be a restriction that subtraction may be used only once within one side of an equation, which is not the case with symbolic algebra. Syncopated algebraic expression first appeared in a series of books called Arithmetica , by Diophantus of Alexandria (3rd century AD; many lost), followed by Brahmagupta 's Brāhmasphuṭasiddhānta (7th century). Acrophonic and Milesian numeration [ edit ] The ancient Greeks employed Attic numeration , [ 22 ] which was based on the system of the Egyptians and was later adapted and used by the Romans . Greek numerals one through four were written as vertical lines, as in the hieroglyphics. The symbol for five was the Greek letter Π (pi), representing the Greek word for 'five' ( pente ). Numbers six through nine were written as a Π with vertical lines beside it. Ten was represented by the letter Δ (delta), from word for 'ten' ( deka ), one hundred by the letter from the word for hundred, and so on. This system was 'acrophonic' since it was based on the first sound of the numeral. [ 22 ] Milesian (Ionian) numeration was another Greek numeral system. It was constructed by partitioning the twenty-four letters of the Greek alphabet, plus three archaic letters, into three classes of nine letters each, and using them to represent the units, tens, and hundreds. [ 22 ] ( Jean Baptiste Joseph Delambre 's Astronomie Ancienne, t. ii.) Α (α) Β (β) Г (γ) Δ (δ) Ε (ε) Ϝ (ϝ) Ζ (ζ) Η (η) θ (θ) Ι (ι) Κ (κ) Λ (λ) Μ (μ) Ν (ν) Ξ (ξ) Ο (ο) Π (π) Ϟ (ϟ) Ρ (ρ) Σ (σ) Τ (τ) Υ (υ) Φ (φ) Χ (χ) Ψ (ψ) Ω (ω) Ϡ (ϡ) 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 This system appeared in the third century BC, before the letters digamma (Ϝ), koppa (Ϟ), and sampi (Ϡ) became obsolete. When lowercase letters became differentiated from uppercase letters, the lowercase letters were used as the symbols for notation. Multiples of one thousand were written as the nine numbers with a stroke in front of them: thus, one thousand was ",α", two thousand was ",β", etc. The letter M (for μύριοι , as in "myriad") was used to multiply numbers by ten thousand. For example, the number 88,888,888 would be written as M,ηωπη*ηωπη. [ 23 ] Milesian numeration, though far less convenient than modern numerals, was formed on a perfectly regular and scientific plan, [ 24 ] and could be used with tolerable effect as an instrument of calculation, to which purpose the Roman system was totally inapplicable. Greek mathematical reasoning was almost entirely geometric (albeit often used to reason about non-geometric subjects such as number theory ), and hence the Greeks had no interest in algebraic symbols. An exception was the great algebraist Diophantus of Alexandria . [ 25 ] His Arithmetica was one of the texts to use symbols in equations. It was not completely symbolic, but was much more so than previous books. In it, an unknown number was called s ; the square of s was Δ y {\displaystyle \Delta ^{y}} ; the cube was K y {\displaystyle K^{y}} ; the fourth power was Δ y Δ {\displaystyle \Delta ^{y}\Delta } ; and the fifth power was Δ K y {\displaystyle \Delta K^{y}} . [ 26 ] So for example, the expression: 2 x 4 + 3 x 3 − 4 x 2 + 5 x − 6 {\displaystyle 2x^{4}+3x^{3}-4x^{2}+5x-6} would be written as: [ citation needed ] SS2 C3 x5 M S4 u6 Chinese mathematical notation [ edit ] Main article: Suzhou numerals See also: Chinese numerals The numbers 0–9 in Chinese huama ( 花碼 ) numerals The ancient Chinese used numerals that look much like the tally system. [ 27 ] Numbers one through four were horizontal lines. Five was an X between two horizontal lines; it looked almost exactly the same as the Roman numeral for ten. Nowadays, this huama numeral system is only used for displaying prices in Chinese markets or on traditional handwritten invoices. Mathematics in China emerged independently by the 11th century BC, [ 28 ] but has much older roots. The ancient Chinese were acquainted with astronomical cycles, geometrical implements like the rule , compass , and plumb-bob , and machines like the wheel and axle . The Chinese independently developed very large and negative numbers , decimals , a place value decimal system, a binary system , algebra, geometry, and trigonometry. As in other early societies, the purpose of astronomy was to perfect the agricultural calendar and other practical tasks, not to establish a formal system ; thus, the duties of the Chinese Board of Mathematics were confined to the annual preparation of the dates and predictions of the almanac. Counting rod numerals Early Chinese mathematical inventions include a place value system known as counting rods [ 29 ] [ 30 ] (which emerged during the Warring States period ), certain geometrical theorems (such as the ratio of sides ), and the suanpan (abacus) for performing arithmetic calculations. Mathematical results were expressed in writing. Ancient Chinese mathematicians did not develop an axiomatic approach, but made advances in algorithm development and algebra. Chinese algebra reached its zenith in the 13th century, when Zhu Shijie invented the method of four unknowns. [ clarification needed ] Early China exemplifies how a civilization may possess considerable skill in the applied arts with only scarce understanding of the formal mathematics on which those arts are founded. Due to linguistic and geographic barriers, as well as content, the mathematics of ancient China and the mathematics of the ancient Mediterranean world are presumed to have developed more or less independently. The final form of The Nine Chapters on the Mathematical Art and the Book on Numbers and Computation and Huainanzi are roughly contemporary with classical Greek mathematics. Some exchange of ideas across Asia through known cultural exchanges from at least Roman times is likely. Frequently, elements of the mathematics of early societies correspond to rudimentary results found later in branches of modern mathematics such as geometry or number theory . For example, the Pythagorean theorem was attested in the Zhoubi Suanjing , and knowledge of Pascal's triangle has also been shown to have existed in China centuries before Blaise Pascal , [ 31 ] articulated by mathematicians like the polymath Shen Kuo . The state of trigonometry advanced during the Song dynasty (960–1279), when Chinese mathematicians had greater need of spherical trigonometry in calendrical science and astronomical calculations. [ 32 ] Shen Kuo used trigonometric functions to solve mathematical problems of chords and arcs. [ 32 ] Shen's work on arc lengths provided the basis for spherical trigonometry developed in the 13th century by the mathematician and astronomer Guo Shoujing . [ 33 ] As the historians L. Gauchet and Joseph Needham state, Guo Shoujing used spherical trigonometry in his calculations to improve the calendar system and Chinese astronomy . [ 32 ] [ 34 ] Chinese mathematics later incorporated the work and teaching of Arab missionaries with knowledge of spherical trigonometry who had come to China during the 13th century. Indian and Arabic numerals and notation [ edit ] See also: Arabic numerals , Hindu–Arabic numeral system , History of the Hindu–Arabic numeral system , and Mathematics in the medieval Islamic world The Hindu–Arabic numeral system and the rules for the use of its operations, in use throughout the world today, likely evolved over the course of the first millennium AD in India and was transmitted to the west via Islamic mathematics. [ 35 ] [ 36 ] Islamic mathematics developed and expanded the mathematics known to Central Asian civilizations, [ 37 ] includi