Machine learning - Wikipedia Jump to content From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Subset of artificial intelligence For the journal, see Machine Learning (journal) . "Statistical learning" redirects here. For statistical learning in linguistics, see Statistical learning in language acquisition . Part of a series on Machine learning and data mining Paradigms Supervised learning Unsupervised learning Semi-supervised learning Self-supervised learning Reinforcement learning Transfer learning Meta-learning Few-shot learning Zero-shot learning Online learning Batch learning Curriculum learning Rule-based learning Neuro-symbolic AI Neuromorphic engineering Quantum machine learning Problems Classification Generative modeling Regression Clustering Dimensionality reduction Density estimation Anomaly detection Data cleaning AutoML Association rules Semantic analysis Structured prediction Feature engineering Feature learning Learning to rank Grammar induction Ontology learning Multimodal learning Supervised learning ( classification • regression ) Apprenticeship learning Decision trees Ensembles Bagging Boosting Random forest k -NN Linear regression Naive Bayes Artificial neural networks Logistic regression Perceptron Relevance vector machine (RVM) Support vector machine (SVM) Clustering BIRCH CURE Hierarchical k -means Fuzzy Expectation–maximization (EM) DBSCAN OPTICS Mean shift Dimensionality reduction Factor analysis Exploratory CCA ICA LDA NMF PCA PGD t-SNE SDL Structured prediction Graphical models Bayes net Conditional random field Hidden Markov Anomaly detection RANSAC k -NN Local outlier factor Isolation forest Neural networks Autoencoder Deep learning Feedforward neural network Recurrent neural network LSTM GRU ESN reservoir computing Boltzmann machine Restricted GAN Diffusion model SOM Convolutional neural network U-Net LeNet AlexNet DeepDream Neural field Neural radiance field Physics-informed neural networks Transformer Vision Mamba Spiking neural network Memtransistor Electrochemical RAM (ECRAM) Reinforcement learning Q-learning Policy gradient SARSA Temporal difference (TD) Multi-agent Self-play Learning with humans Active learning Crowdsourcing Human-in-the-loop Mechanistic interpretability RLHF Model diagnostics Coefficient of determination Confusion matrix Learning curve ROC curve Mathematical foundations Kernel machines Bias–variance tradeoff Computational learning theory Empirical risk minimization Occam learning PAC learning Statistical learning VC theory Topological deep learning Journals and conferences AAAI CVPR ECCV ECML PKDD EMNLP ICCV NeurIPS ICML ICLR IJCAI ML JMLR Related articles Glossary of artificial intelligence List of datasets for machine-learning research List of datasets in computer vision and image processing Outline of machine learning v t e Part of a series on Artificial intelligence (AI) Major goals Artificial general intelligence superintelligence Intelligent agent Recursive self-improvement Planning Computer vision General game playing Knowledge representation Natural language processing Robotics AI safety Approaches Machine learning Data mining Symbolic Deep learning Bayesian networks Evolutionary algorithms Neuro-symbolic AI Systems integration Open-source Open weights AI data centers Applications Art Music Bioinformatics Deepfake Earth sciences Finance Generative AI Audio Images Government Healthcare Industry Software development Translation Military Physics Projects Philosophy AI alignment Artificial consciousness The bitter lesson Chinese room Friendly AI Ethics Existential risk Turing test Uncanny valley Human–AI interaction History Timeline Progress AI winter AI boom AI build-out financing AI bubble Controversies Deepfake pornography Taylor Swift deepfake pornography controversy Grok sexual deepfake scandal Google Gemini image generation controversy It's the Most Terrible Time of the Year Navier–Stokes priority controversy Pause Giant AI Experiments Project Panama Removal of Sam Altman from OpenAI Statement on AI Risk Tay (chatbot) Théâtre D'opéra Spatial Voiceverse NFT plagiarism scandal AI-generated violent extremist content Glossary v t e Machine learning ( ML ) is a field of study in artificial intelligence concerned with the development and study of statistical algorithms that can learn from data and generalize to unseen data, and thus perform tasks without being explicitly programmed . [ 1 ] Statistics and mathematical optimisation methods compose the foundations of machine learning. Data mining is a related field of study, focusing on exploratory data analysis (EDA) through unsupervised learning . {{rp|vii}}"}},"i":0}}]}'> [ 3 ] [ 4 ] From a theoretical viewpoint, probably approximately correct learning provides a mathematical and statistical framework for describing machine learning. Most traditional machine learning and deep learning algorithms can be described as empirical risk minimisation under this framework. Advances in the field of deep learning have allowed neural networks , a class of statistical algorithms, to surpass many previous machine learning approaches in performance. The resulting dominance of machine learning within the field of AI from the late 2000s and early 2010s onwards was such that the terms "machine learning" and "artificial intelligence" are now often used interchangeably, even though they are not synonymous. [ 5 ] History [ edit ] For a chronological guide, see Timeline of machine learning . The term machine learning was coined in 1959 by Arthur Samuel , an IBM employee and pioneer in the field of computer gaming and artificial intelligence . [ 6 ] [ 7 ] The synonym self-teaching computers was also used during this time period. [ 8 ] [ 9 ] The earliest machine learning program was introduced in the 1950s, when Samuel invented a computer program that calculated the chance of winning in checkers for each side, but the history of machine learning is rooted in decades of efforts to study human cognitive processes. [ 10 ] In 1949, Canadian psychologist Donald Hebb published the book The Organization of Behavior , in which he introduced a theoretical neural structure formed by certain interactions among nerve cells . [ 11 ] The Hebbian theory of neuron interaction set the groundwork for how many machine learning algorithms work, with connected artificial neurons changing the strength of their connections based on data. [ 10 ] Other researchers who have studied human cognitive systems contributed to the modern machine learning technologies as well, including Walter Pitts and Warren McCulloch , who proposed the first mathematical model of neural networks including algorithms that mirror human thought processes. [ 10 ] [ verification needed ] By the early 1960s, an experimental "learning machine" with punched tape memory, called Cybertron, had been developed by Raytheon Company to analyse sonar signals, electrocardiograms , and speech patterns using rudimentary reinforcement learning . It was repetitively "trained" by a human operator/teacher to recognise patterns and equipped with a " goof " button to cause it to reevaluate incorrect decisions. [ 12 ] [ importance? ] A representative book [ citation needed ] on research into machine learning during the 1960s was Nils Nilsson 's book "Learning Machines", dealing mostly with machine learning for pattern classification . [ 13 ] Interest related to pattern recognition continued into the 1970s, as described by Duda and Hart in 1973. [ 14 ] In 1981, a report was given on using teaching strategies so that an artificial neural network learns to recognise 40 characters (26 letters, 10 digits, and 4 special symbols) from a computer terminal. [ 15 ] Tom M. Mitchell provided a widely quoted, [ citation needed ] more formal definition of the algorithms studied in the machine learning field: "A computer program is said to learn from experience E with respect to some class of tasks T and performance measure P if its performance at tasks in T , as measured by P , improves with experience E ." [ 16 ] This definition of the tasks in which machine learning is concerned is fundamentally operational rather than defining the field in cognitive terms. This follows Alan Turing 's proposal in his paper " Computing Machinery and Intelligence ", in which the question, "Can machines think?", is replaced by asking whether machines can convincingly imitate a human in its responses to human-posed questions. [ 17 ] [ 18 ] In 2012, AlexNet , developed by Alex Krizhevsky , Ilya Sutskever , and Geoffrey Hinton , achieved substantially improved results in the ImageNet image recognition competition, contributing to the wider adoption of deep neural networks. [ 19 ] In 2013, Tomáš Mikolov and colleagues introduced word2vec , techniques for efficiently learning distributed vector representations of words from large text corpora. [ 20 ] [ 21 ] In 2014, Ian Goodfellow and colleagues introduced generative adversarial networks (GANs), a framework for training generative models through an adversarial process. [ 22 ] In 2016, AlphaGo became the first computer program to defeat a professional human Go player without handicaps on a full-sized board, using deep neural networks and reinforcement learning . [ 23 ] In 2017, Ashish Vaswani and colleagues introduced the Transformer , a neural network architecture based primarily on attention rather than recurrence or convolution. [ 24 ] Relationships to other fields [ edit ] Artificial intelligence [ edit ] Deep learning is a subset of machine learning, which is itself a subset of artificial intelligence . [ 25 ] As a scientific endeavour, machine learning grew out of the quest for artificial intelligence (AI). In the early days of AI as an academic discipline , some researchers were interested in having machines learn from data. They attempted to approach the problem with various symbolic methods, as well as what were then termed " neural networks "; these were mostly perceptrons and other models that were later found to be reinventions of the generalised linear models of statistics. [ 26 ] Probabilistic reasoning was also employed, especially in automated medical diagnosis . [ 27 ] : 488 However, an increasing emphasis on the logical, knowledge-based approach caused a rift between AI and machine learning. Probabilistic systems were plagued by theoretical and practical problems of data acquisition and representation. [ 27 ] : 488 By 1980, expert systems had come to dominate AI, and statistics was out of favour. [ 28 ] Work on symbolic/knowledge-based learning continued within AI, leading to inductive logic programming (ILP), but the more statistical line of research was now outside the field of AI proper, in pattern recognition and information retrieval . [ 27 ] : 708–710, 755 Neural network research was abandoned by AI and computer science around the same time. This subfield, termed " connectionism ", was continued by researchers from other disciplines, including John Hopfield , David Rumelhart , and Geoffrey Hinton . Their main success came in the mid-1980s with the reinvention of backpropagation . [ 27 ] : 25 Machine learning (ML), reorganised and recognised as its own field, started to flourish in the 1990s. The field changed its goal from achieving artificial intelligence to tackling solvable problems of a practical nature. It shifted focus away from the symbolic approaches it had inherited from AI, and toward methods and models borrowed from statistics, fuzzy logic , and probability theory . [ 28 ] Data compression [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Data compression § Machine learning . [ edit ] There is a close connection between machine learning and compression. A system that predicts the posterior probabilities of a sequence given its entire history can be used for optimal data compression (by using arithmetic coding on the output distribution). Conversely, an optimal compressor can be used for prediction (by finding the symbol that compresses best, given the previous history). This equivalence has been used as a justification for using data compression as a benchmark for "general intelligence". [ 29 ] [ 30 ] [ 31 ] An alternative view can show compression algorithms implicitly map strings into implicit feature space vectors , and compression-based similarity measures compute similarity within these feature spaces. For each compressor C(.) we define an associated vector space ℵ, such that C(.) maps an input string x, corresponding to the vector norm ||~x||. An exhaustive examination of the feature spaces underlying all compression algorithms is precluded by space; instead, feature vectors chooses to examine three representative lossless compression methods, LZW, LZ77, and PPM. [ 32 ] According to AIXI theory, a connection more directly explained in Hutter Prize , the best possible compression of x is the smallest possible software that generates x. For example, in that model, a zip file's compressed size includes both the zip file and the unzipping software, since you can not unzip it without both, but there may be an even smaller combined form. Examples of AI-powered audio/video compression software include NVIDIA Maxine , AIVC. [ 33 ] Examples of software that can perform AI-powered image compression include OpenCV , TensorFlow , MATLAB 's Image Processing Toolbox (IPT) and High-Fidelity Generative Image Compression. [ 34 ] In unsupervised machine learning , k-means clustering can be utilized to compress data by grouping similar data points into clusters. This technique simplifies handling extensive datasets that lack predefined labels and finds widespread use in fields such as image compression . [ 35 ] Data compression aims to reduce the size of data files, enhancing storage efficiency and speeding up data transmission. K-means clustering, an unsupervised machine learning algorithm, is employed to partition a dataset into a specified number of clusters, k, each represented by the centroid of its points. This process condenses extensive datasets into a more compact set of representative points. Particularly beneficial in image and signal processing , k-means clustering aids in data reduction by replacing groups of data points with their centroids, thereby preserving the core information of the original data while significantly decreasing the required storage space. [ 36 ] Large language models (LLMs) are also efficient lossless data compressors on some data sets, as demonstrated by DeepMind 's research with the Chinchilla 70B model. Developed by DeepMind, Chinchilla 70B effectively compressed data, outperforming conventional methods such as Portable Network Graphics (PNG) for images and Free Lossless Audio Codec (FLAC) for audio. It achieved compression of image and audio data to 43.4% and 16.4% of their original sizes, respectively. There is, however, some reason to be concerned that the data set used for testing overlaps the LLM training data set, making it possible that the Chinchilla 70B model is only an efficient compression tool on data it has already been trained on. [ 37 ] [ 38 ] Data mining [ edit ] Machine learning and data mining often employ the same methods and overlap significantly, but while machine learning focuses on prediction based on known properties learned from the training data, data mining focuses on the discovery of previously unknown properties in the data (this is the analysis step of knowledge discovery in databases). Data mining uses many machine learning methods, but with different goals; on the other hand, machine learning also employs data mining methods as " unsupervised learning " or as a preprocessing step to improve learner accuracy. Much of the confusion between these two research communities comes from the basic assumptions they work with: in machine learning, performance is usually evaluated with respect to the ability to reproduce known knowledge, while in knowledge discovery and data mining (KDD) the key task is the discovery of previously unknown knowledge. Evaluated with respect to known knowledge, an uninformed (unsupervised) method will easily be outperformed by other supervised methods, while in a typical KDD task, supervised methods cannot be used due to the unavailability of training data. [ citation needed ] Machine learning also has intimate ties to optimization : Many learning problems are formulated as minimisation of some loss function on a training set of examples. Loss functions express the discrepancy between the predictions of the model being trained and the actual problem instances (for example, in classification, one wants to assign a label to instances, and models are trained to correctly predict the preassigned labels of a set of examples). [ 39 ] Generalization [ edit ] Characterizing the generalisation of various learning algorithms is an active topic of current research, especially for deep learning algorithms. [ citation needed ] Statistics [ edit ] Machine learning and statistics are closely related fields in terms of methods, but distinct in their principal goal: statistics draws population inferences from a sample , while machine learning finds generalisable predictive patterns. [ 40 ] Conventional statistical analyses require the a priori selection of a model most suitable for the study data set. In addition, only significant or theoretically relevant variables based on previous experience are included for analysis. In contrast, machine learning is not built on a pre-structured model; rather, the data shape the model by detecting underlying patterns. The more variables (input) used to train the model, the more accurate the ultimate model will be. [ 41 ] Leo Breiman distinguished two statistical modelling paradigms: the data model and the algorithmic model, [ 42 ] wherein "algorithmic model" means more or less the machine learning algorithms like Random forest . [ clarification needed ] Some statisticians have adopted methods from machine learning, producing the field of statistical learning . [ 43 ] Statistical physics [ edit ] Analytical and computational techniques derived from deep-rooted physics of disordered systems can be extended to large-scale problems, including machine learning, e.g., to analyse the weight space of deep neural networks . [ 44 ] Statistical physics is thus finding applications in the area of medical diagnostics . [ 45 ] [ clarification needed ] Theory [ edit ] Main articles: Computational learning theory and Statistical learning theory A core objective of a learner is to generalise from its experience. [ 2 ] [ 46 ] Generalisation in this context is the ability of a learning machine to perform accurately on new, unseen examples/tasks after having experienced a learning data set. The training examples come from some generally unknown probability distribution (considered representative of the space of occurrences) and the learner has to build a general model about this space that enables it to produce sufficiently accurate predictions in new cases. The computational analysis of machine learning algorithms and their performance is a branch of theoretical computer science known as computational learning theory . One major framework is the probably approximately correct learning model. Because training sets are finite and the future is uncertain, learning theory usually does not yield guarantees of the performance of algorithms. Instead, probabilistic bounds on the performance are quite common. The bias–variance decomposition is one way to quantify generalisation error . [ citation needed ] For the best performance in the context of generalisation, the complexity of the hypothesis should match the complexity of the function underlying the data. If the hypothesis is less complex than the function, then the model has underfitted the data. If the complexity of the model is increased in response, then the training error decreases. But if the hypothesis is too complex, then the model is subject to 