History of Key West - Wikipedia Jump to content From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia History of Florida Map of Florida et Regiones Vicinae from ca. 1640 Topics Cities Bartow Fort Lauderdale Gainesville Key West Sarasota St. Augustine West Palm Beach Ybor City Counties Brevard County Palm Beach County Politics Women's suffrage in Florida Timeline Pre-history, until 1497 Spanish Rule , 1513–1763 British Rule , 1763–1783: American Revolutionary War , 1775–1783 Spanish Rule, 1783–1821: War of 1812 , 1811–1814 First Seminole War , 1817–1818 U.S. Territorial Period , 1822–1845: Capitol moved to Tallahassee , 1824 Second Seminole War , 1835–1842 Constitutional convention , 1838 Statehood , 1845–present: Third Seminole War , 1855–1858 Ordinance of Secession , 1861 Civil War , 1861–1865 3rd Constitution , 1865 Reconstruction , 1865–1868 4th Constitution , 1868 5th Constitution , 1885 Great Migration , 1910–1930 Land Boom , 1925–1929 6th Constitution , 1968 Gore v. Harris , Presidential Election , 2000 COVID-19 pandemic , 2020–2022 Florida portal v t e The history of Key West begins thousands of years prior to recorded European contact , when the island became largely occupied by the Calusa and Tequesta Native American tribes . By the end of the Age of Discovery , Key West 's indigenous history had largely diminished; brief settlements by transient Seminoles in the late 18th century introduced temporary trade in the surrounding Florida Keys , with early fishing and wrecking revenues becoming lucrative among passing Natives in the region. The island's first documented exploration by Europeans occurred in 1513 by the Spanish explorer Juan Ponce de León while attempting to reach Florida's Gulf Coast . [ note 1 ] [ 1 ] The island soon adopted the Spanish name, Cayo Hueso , literally meaning "bone cay", referring to the scattered bones attributed to inter‑tribal warring among Indigenous inhabitants. [ note 2 ] [ 2 ] Although ownership was claimed by the Spanish explorers, no permanent settlement had been established, and possession of the island was briefly asserted by the British Empire in 1763. [ 3 ] Following Spain 's cession of Florida to the United States in 1819, the first permanent colonization of Key West began with American possession in 1821. [ 4 ] Legal claim of the island occurred with the purchase by businessman John W. Simonton in 1822, in which federal property was asserted only three months later with the arrival of US Navy Lieutenant Matthew C. Perry . After being designated as an official Port of Entry in 1828, Key West's wrecking industry became a significant factor in the island's growing economy. By the 1830s, Key West was the wealthiest city in the United States per capita. [ 5 ] Shortly after Florida's secession from the United States in 1861, Federal forces seized Fort Zachary Taylor , securing their position in Key West as a stronghold for the duration of the ensuing American Civil War . [ 6 ] The East Gulf Blockade Squadron , established on the island by the Union navy to restrict supplies reaching Confederate ports, played a significant role in supporting Union blockade operations in the Gulf of Mexico during the conflict with the South. [ 7 ] With the completion of Henry Flagler 's Overseas Railroad in the early 1910s, Key West was connected to the Florida mainland with Flagler's extension of the Florida East Coast Railway (FEC). [ 8 ] In the years prior to the Cuban Revolution in 1953, frequent transport closely linked Key West and Havana. During the Cuban Missile Crisis , the island later became a strategic position for installation of missile defense systems and military personnel in the event of a sudden attack from Cuba . In his speeches regarding Fidel Castro , President John F. Kennedy often used the phrase "90 miles from Cuba" in reference to Key West's close proximity to Cuba. Authors Lynn M. Homan and Thomas Reilly defined Key West's role in the 20th century as that of a significant " artistic haven ". [ 9 ] The island was home to novelist Ernest Hemingway for eight years, during which he wrote several of his major works. It also served as a longtime residence for playwright Tennessee Williams , who spent much of his later life on the island. In subsequent decades, Key West hosted a number of prominent writers, including John Hersey , Wallace Stevens , Robert Frost , Elizabeth Bishop , Shel Silverstein , and Thomas McGuane , as well as various musicians and celebrities such as Jimmy Buffett , Jerry Jeff Walker , Richard Burton , and Sally Rand . [ 9 ] Prehistory and settlement [ edit ] Geological development [ edit ] According to USGS geologists, Barbara Lidz and Eugene Shinn, the geological history of Key West coincides with the early sedimentary development of the Florida Keys in the latter part of the Pleistocene and Holocene epochs in the last 500 million years. [ 10 ] Early deposition resulted in the accumulation of Pleistocene limestone over 200 feet in width in the Lower Keys. Key West and the Lower Keys are categorized geologically by their particular coralloid composition , sometimes classified as the High Coral Keys, Low Coral Keys and the Oolite Keys for their early foundation of sandbars and ooid composition. [ 11 ] Key West is geologically distinctive from the rest of the Keys due to nonlinear orientation westward compared with the Upper Keys and Middle Keys, often attributed to the influence of southward or westward- trending currents . While largely formed from shallow sandbars and oolite shoals, evidence that Key West existed as a dense and inhabited "coral forest" reaching height of 10 to 18 feet is distinguishable from the "Low Coral Keys" with coral heights from five to ten feet. During this period of geological formation, Key West's foundation was composed of compacted oolite deposits of calcium carbonate laying above Miami Colite limestone. [ 12 ] The reduction of sea levels from the formation of glaciers during the Ice age resulted in the collapse of Key West's early coral forests. Geological shifts in the Pleistocene Epoch, 2–3 million years ago, may have altered the island into the shallow sand cays as it would be known as by human settlers. These shoals were shallow enough to facilitate photosynthesis and the development of coral reefs . [ 13 ] As sea levels continuously lowered during the following periods of geological formation, the Florida Keys was eventually disconnected from the Florida mainland following its exposure as a landmass 100,000 to 125,000 years ago. During this time, Key West saw significantly less coral reef development than the Upper Keys as a result of the region's nutrient rich exchange of waters through perpendicular channels from the Gulf of Mexico to the Atlantic . [ 14 ] Human settlement [ edit ] Historian John Viele traces possible human occupation of Key West to 3000 B.C.E , [ 15 ] with indigenous groups related to Calusas , Matecumbes , Tequestas , and late Seminoles possibly settling in more than 800 islands in the Florida Keys. According to contemporary historian Jerry Wilkinson, the dominant inhabitants of the Florida Keys were likely the Calusa, however, the discovery of pottery fragments later indicated the presence of Tequesta and possibly evidence for Caribbean Island Natives . [ 16 ] Wilkinson posits further archeological evidence indicating that the Calusa occupants may have functioned as a confederation composed of smaller tribes such as the Tequesta, Ais , or Jeaga . [ 17 ] Primarily hunter-gatherers , the island's abundant source of fish, turtle, [obster, shellfish , and manatees provided native settlers with copious staple foods and even the installation of temporary trade outposts by later Seminoles. [ 18 ] Spanish documents record a " Chief of the Key Bones", referring to a possible tribal leader or early chiefdom on Key West. [ 18 ] During the period of Spanish control, many of Key West's native groups adopted aspects of the Spanish language, customs , and surnames , with evidence of the use of Spanish titles such as "captain-gener-al" "bishop", and "king" by Native leaders. [ 19 ] Juan Ponce de León Upon sighting Key West during his voyage south along the keys in 1513, Ponce de León and his Spanish fleet adopted the island's original name of Cayo Hueso ( Spanish pronunciation: [ ˈkaʝo ˈweso ] ) . The initial discovery of dried human bones reported along the island's beaches generally align with modern interpretations to be remnants of several battles fought between rivaling tribes and subsequently used as communal graveyard . [ 20 ] In his correspondence with the lawyer and politician John Rodman in the 1830s, the then Collector of Customs and surveyor in Key West, William A. Whitehead , describes an early account of intermittent occupation of the island by various feuding "aborigines of the country." [ 21 ] On the presence of Natives, Whitehead notes evidence of fortifications , possible burial grounds, and human bones initially believed to be rocks. [ 22 ] An account relayed by a resident of 50 years describes how, approximately 130 years prior, two distinct Native American tribes, the island inhabitants and those from the mainland, came into conflict: Spanish map of the Florida Keys and Dry Tortugas c., 1591 In his early years he had heard it stated that some eighty or ninety years previous, (probably about the commencement of the eighteenth century) the Indians inhabiting the Islands along the coast, and those on the main land, were of different tribes, and as the Islanders frequently visited the main for the purpose of hunting, a feud arose between the two tribes, and those from the main having made an irruption into the Islands, their inhabitants were driven from island to island until they reached Key West. Here, as they could flee no farther, they were compelled to risk a final battle, which resulted in the almost entire extermination of the islanders. Only a few escaped (and that by a miracle, as they embarked in canoes upon the ocean) whose descendants, it is said, were known to have been met with in the Island of Cuba. — William A. Whitehead , A Sketch of the History of Key West, Florida , "Address," page 5 Upon discovery, Ponce de León soon claimed the island on behalf of Spain, with possible evidence of trade between Spanish vessels and Key West natives appears throughout the 17th century during Spanish colonization. However, Key West was considered to be of little value to the Spanish Empire, and with the exchange of Florida control from Spain to the Kingdom of Great Britain in 1763 , the island fell under English possession. Two explanations have been offered for the origin of the name. Although there is no authentic records of the origin of the name Key West, possible anglicization during British authority likely altered the name of Cayo Hueso ("Bone Cay") to a modified Key West in following years. [ note 3 ] [ 20 ] Another suggests that it derives from the island's position as the westernmost of the chain of islands—or keys—extending from the Florida mainland, hence the name "Key West." [ 23 ] The island's initial surveyor William Whitehead accepted the former theory, saying in a letter: "...hence the name of the island, Cayo Hueso , which the English, with the same facility which enabled them to transform the name of the wine Xeres Seco into 'Sherry Sack,' corrupted into Key West." [ 23 ] With the onset of British control of Florida , Key West became mostly uninhabited, with neither the arriving British nor Spanish exercising de facto control. [ 24 ] In 1766, Major general and East Florida governor, James Grant , proposed the idea of establishing a military base on Key West to further regulate any activity in its surrounding waters. Grant often urged that a post or settlement on Key West would be ideally situated for trade with Havana and have a strategic advantage point in the case of a war with Cuba, but nothing came of his plea. After observing fleets of about 30 Cuban and 14 Bahamian fishing vessels in the Florida Keys, Grant became insistent on preventing the intrusion of foreign vessels, as he feared their presence could threaten British control of Florida. [ 25 ] Grant consisted of no means to prevent the situation. [ note 4 ] [ 26 ] For much of the 18th century, smugglers and privateers used the island to conceal valuables, while Bahamians and Cubans often visited for fishing and other various forms of resource manufacture. [ 27 ] British expansion westward in the Thirteen Colonies prompted the immigration south by many of the Creek Indian Nation in the early 1700s. These migrants, who settled much in Florida, came as far as Key West in 1770. [ 28 ] Raids by outside natives in the early 1700s, supported and sometimes led by the British, [ 24 ] resulted in the destruction of several Spanish missions in Florida . [ 29 ] As a result, many of the remaining natives of Key West fled to Cuba. The 1750s and 1760s saw the last Native American residents of Key West, when roughly eighty families of Calusa natives reportedly took refuge on the island in 1763. [ 24 ] 19th century [ edit ] Founding and development [ edit ] During the early 19th century, with neither Spain nor Britain maintaining effective authority over Key West, residents of Havana continued to issue fishing licenses to vessels in the British territory. [ 25 ] On 26 August 1815, the Royal Spanish Navy Artillery officer, Juan Pablo Salas, acquired a Spanish land grant of Key West from Juan José de Estrada , [ 30 ] the 7th governor of Spanish East Florida , for his "meritorious service to the King of Spain ". [ 31 ] [ 20 ] Six years later on 21 December, 1821, the American businessman from Mobile, Alabama , John W. Simonton offered to purchase Sala's land grant for $2,000. [ 32 ] Simonton, who Jefferson B. Browne writes was initially attracted by Key West's "advantageous situation and capacity of the harbor " [ 33 ] and its proximity to major shipping lanes , [ 34 ] conducted the purchase with Salas while meeting in Havana following Spain's formal cession of Florida to the United States in 1821. [ 20 ] Eager to sell the island, Salas had initially sold Key West for a total of $575 to a former governor of South Carolina , General John Geddes , who was unable to secure the rights before Simonton, assisted by influential friends from Washington D.C. , asserted legal claim in January, 1822. [ 35 ] During the purchasing process, Simonton was joined by three business partners—John Whitehead, John Fleeming (now spelled Fleming), and Colonel Pardon C. Greene. Soon after the purchase, Simonton sold half of his interest to John Whitehead and John W. Fleeming, both then of Mobile, Alabama. He sold an additional quarter interest to John Warner and John Mountain, whose share was later vested in Greene, who resided on the island. The island was subsequently divided into three separate properties, each allocated to one of these partners. [ 22 ] [ 36 ] As a result, Simonton, Whitehead, Fleeming, and Greene were hailed the "founding fathers" of Key West by the Keys Weekly Newspapers . [ 37 ] During his business travels between ports in the Gulf of Mexico and the eastern seaboard, John Whitehead often saw Key West but never stopped there. His first visit to the island was unplanned. While sailing from Mobile, Alabama, to New York City, the ship he was on was wrecked in the Straits of Florida. When wrecking crews arrived to salvage cargo from the shipwreck, they transported the passengers, crew, and John Whitehead to Key West. Following his arrival, Whitehead explored the island. [ 37 ] Key West's Whitehead Street, which runs roughly north-south through Old Town, is named after John Whitehead. [ 38 ] William A. Whitehead , a native of New Jersey , joined his elder brother John in Key West in 1828 and quickly became a prominent figure in the developing community. In 1829, he conducted a survey of the town after Key West received its first government charter. In 1830, Whitehead was appointed collector of customs; during the same year, he was in charge of Key West's port of entry. [ 39 ] [ 38 ] On March 25, 1822, Lt. Matthew C. Perry commandeered the USS Shark , a schooner armed with 12 guns, sailed into Key West, and formally claimed the island as de facto property of the United States. Upon claiming the island, Perry renamed Key West to "Thompson's Island" and its harbor "Port Rodgers" in honor of the Secretary of the Navy , Smith Thompson , and War of 1812 hero and President of the Navy Supervisors Board, John Rodgers . [ 40 ] Following the signing of the Adams–Onís Treaty in 1819 by Secretary of State, John Quincy Adams , and Foreign Minister of Spain, Luis de Onis , thousands of tracts of coral and Atlantic shallows offshore of the Florida Keys (what now makes up the Florida Reef ), was made an extension of U.S. soil. "An Act to Protect the Commerce of the United States, and Crimes of Piracy" [ 41 ] was signed into law and authorized by President James Monroe to create a special unit of the Navy, that would be known as the West Indies Squadron , to combat piracy and the slave trade in the waters surrounding Key West and the Florida Keys. Commodore James Biddle was named the squadron's first commander and was assigned a fleet of 14 ships. Biddle employed mostly heavy-drafted ships that proved to be ineffective in the pursuit of pirates who favored shallow-drafted vessels for agile navigation in the shoals and reefs of the West Indies . [ 41 ] Commodor David Porter (1780–1843). His use of military authority and quasi-dictatorial control in Key West and the surrounding region drew significant official criticism. [ 42 ] In 1823, Secretary Smith Thompson replaced Biddle with Commodore David Porter of the USS Firefly , the flagship of a five-ship squadron tasked with the disruption of British trade in the West Indies, and granted him control over Key West. [ 43 ] With a large portion of wealthy merchant fleets operating through the island's ports, the waters of Key West became a significant point of interest for pirates to prey on shipping lanes; to combat the piracy, Porter organized the "Mosquito Fleet": his command of 10 Chesapeake Bay schooners , five swift shallow-drafted vessels, and the steam-powered USS Seagull . [ 44 ] [ 45 ] [ 46 ] Key West's Naval base was established in 1823 (in what is now known as Mallory Square ) to avert the theft of the island's merchant vessels. Porter, who ruled Key West under martial law as a military dictator, was delegated the assignment of counter-piracy and control over the island's slave trade . [ 47 ] In 1831, Porter noted the strategic value of Key West's military outpost: qtd.\"Key West s Bicentennial\" (2022), p 4 /ref>"},"align":{"wt":"right"},"width":{"wt":"21em"},"fontsize":{"wt":"85%"},"bgcolor":{"wt":"#FFF8E7"},"style":{"wt":"padding:1.5em"}},"i":0}}]}'> A Salute of 17 Guns is to be find at 8 o'clock this morning from the Battery in front of the Town, and the American Ensign is to be hoisted at the Flag Staff. The town is hereafter called Allenton, and the Battery, Thompsons Battery. — Commodore David Porter, From the General Order, April 6th 1823 , aboard the U.S.S. Peacock , officially honoring American ownership of Key West. [ 48 ] The advantages of Key West's location as a military and naval station has no equal except Gibraltar. ... It commands the outlets of all trade from Jamaica , the Caribbean Sea , the Bay of Honduras , and the Gulf of Mexico, and is a check to the naval forces of whatever nation may hold Cuba. — Commodore David Porter, "Letter to Congress, December 29, 1829,", Public Documents Printed by Order of the Senate of the United States, First Session of the Twenty-Fourth Congress , vol. V, doc. no. 359 (December 7, 1835), 13–15 Early prosperity [ edit ] Porter was court-martialed after invading the town of Fajardo, Puerto Rico and resigned from the U.S. Navy on 18 August, 1826. [ 49 ] Two years 