History of the World Wide Web - Wikipedia Jump to content From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia "Web history" redirects here. For the feature of web browsers, see Web browsing history . World Wide Web The Web's former logo by Robert Cailliau Inventor Tim Berners-Lee Inception 12 March 1989 ; 37 years ago ( 1989-03-12 ) History of computing Hardware Hardware 1960s to present Software Software Software configuration management Unix Free and open-source software Computer science Artificial intelligence Compiler construction Early computer science Operating systems Programming languages Prominent pioneers Software engineering Modern concepts General-purpose CPUs Graphical user interface Internet Laptops Personal computers Video games World Wide Web Cloud Quantum By country Bulgaria Eastern Bloc Poland Romania South America Soviet Union Yugoslavia Timeline of computing before 1950 1950–1979 1980–1989 1990–1999 2000–2009 2010–2019 2020–present more timelines ... Glossary of computer science Category v t e The World Wide Web ("WWW", "W3" or simply "the Web") is a global information medium that users can access via computers connected to the Internet . The term is often used as a synonym for the Internet, but the Web is a service that operates over the Internet, just as email and videoconferencing do. The history of the Internet and the history of hypertext date back significantly further than that of the World Wide Web. Tim Berners-Lee invented the World Wide Web while working at CERN in 1989. He proposed a "universal linked information system" using several concepts and technologies, the most fundamental of which was the connections that existed between information. [ 1 ] [ 2 ] He developed the first web server , the first web browser , and a document formatting protocol, called Hypertext Markup Language (HTML). After publishing the markup language in 1991, and releasing the browser source code for public use in 1993, many other web browsers were soon developed, with Marc Andreessen 's Mosaic (later Netscape Navigator ) being particularly easy to use and install, and often credited with sparking the Internet boom of the 1990s. It was a graphical browser which ran on several popular office and home computers, bringing multimedia content to non-technical users by including images and text on the same page. Websites for use by the general public began to emerge in 1993–94. This spurred competition in server and browser software, highlighted in the Browser wars which was initially dominated by Netscape Navigator and Internet Explorer . Following the complete removal of commercial restrictions on Internet use by 1995, commercialization of the Web amidst macroeconomic factors led to the dot-com boom and bust in the late 1990s and early 2000s. The features of HTML evolved over time, leading to HTML version 2 in 1995, HTML3 and HTML4 in 1997, and HTML5 in 2014. The language was extended with advanced formatting in Cascading Style Sheets (CSS) and with programming capability by JavaScript . AJAX programming delivered dynamic content to users, which sparked a new era in Web design , styled Web 2.0 . The use of social media , becoming commonplace in the 2010s, allowed users to compose multimedia content without programming skills, making the Web ubiquitous in everyday life. Background [ edit ] See also: History of the Internet and History of hypertext Precursors [ edit ] The underlying concept of hypertext as a user interface paradigm originated in projects in the 1960s, from research such as the Hypertext Editing System (HES) by Andries van Dam at Brown University, IBM Generalized Markup Language , Ted Nelson 's Project Xanadu , and Douglas Engelbart 's oN-Line System (NLS). [ 3 ] [ page needed ] [ non-primary source needed ] Both Nelson and Engelbart were in turn inspired by Vannevar Bush 's microfilm -based memex , which was described in the 1945 essay " As We May Think ". [ 4 ] [ title missing ] [ 5 ] Other precursors were FRESS and Intermedia . Paul Otlet 's project Mundaneum has also been named as an early 20th-century precursor of the Web. ENQUIRE [ edit ] In 1980, Tim Berners-Lee , at the European Organization for Nuclear Research (CERN) in Switzerland, built ENQUIRE , as a personal database of people and software models, but also as a way to experiment with hypertext; each new page of information in ENQUIRE had to be linked to another page. [ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] When Berners-Lee built ENQUIRE, the ideas developed by Bush, Engelbart, and Nelson did not influence his work, since he was not aware of them. However, as Berners-Lee began to refine his ideas, the work of these predecessors would later help to confirm the legitimacy of his concept. [ 9 ] [ 10 ] During the 1980s, many packet-switched data networks emerged based on various communication protocols (see Protocol Wars ). One of these standards was the Internet protocol suite , which is often referred to as TCP/IP. As the Internet grew through the 1980s, many people realized the increasing need to be able to find and organize files and use information. By 1985, the Domain Name System (upon which the Uniform Resource Locator is built) came into being. [ 11 ] [ better source needed ] [ failed verification ] Many small, self-contained hypertext systems were created, such as Apple Computer's HyperCard (1987). Return to CERN [ edit ] Berners-Lee's contract in 1980 was from June to December, but in 1984 he returned to CERN in a permanent role, and considered its problems of information management: physicists from around the world needed to share data, yet they lacked common machines and any shared presentation software. Shortly after Berners-Lee's return to CERN, TCP/IP protocols were installed on Unix machines at the institution, turning it into the largest Internet site in Europe. In 1988, the first direct IP connection between Europe and North America was established and Berners-Lee began to openly discuss the possibility of a web-like system at CERN. [ 12 ] He was inspired by a book, Enquire Within upon Everything . Many online services existed before the creation of the World Wide Web, such as CompuServe , Usenet , [ 13 ] Internet Relay Chat , [ 14 ] Telnet [ 15 ] and bulletin board systems . [ 16 ] Before the internet, UUCP was used for online services such as e-mail , [ 17 ] and BITNET was also another popular network. [ 18 ] 1989–1991: Origins [ edit ] CERN [ edit ] The NeXT Computer used by Tim Berners-Lee at CERN became the first Web server. The corridor where the World Wide Web was born, on the ground floor of building No. 1 at CERN Where the WEB was born While working at CERN , Tim Berners-Lee became frustrated with the inefficiencies and difficulties posed by finding information stored on different computers. [ 19 ] On 12 March 1989, he submitted a memorandum, titled "Information Management: A Proposal", [ 1 ] [ 20 ] to the management at CERN. (At the beginning of chapter 12 of his 2025 book, Berners-Lee confides that "the first document reads only 'March 1989'" — that he gave "12 March — which is actually my mother's birthday.") The proposal used the term "web" and was based on "a large hypertext database with typed links". It described a system called "Mesh" that referenced ENQUIRE , the database and software project he had built in 1980, with a more elaborate information management system based on links embedded as text: "Imagine, then, the references in this document all being associated with the network address of the thing to which they referred, so that while reading this document, you could skip to them with a click of the mouse." Such a system, he explained, could be referred to using one of the existing meanings of the word hypertext , a term that he says was coined in the 1950s. Berners-Lee notes the possibility of multimedia documents that include graphics, speech and video, which he terms hypermedia . [ 1 ] [ 2 ] Although the proposal attracted little interest, Berners-Lee was encouraged by his manager, Mike Sendall, to begin implementing his system on a newly acquired NeXT workstation. He considered several names, including Information Mesh , The Information Mine or Mine of Information , but settled on World Wide Web . Berners-Lee found an enthusiastic supporter in his colleague and fellow hypertext enthusiast Robert Cailliau who began to promote the proposed system throughout CERN. Berners-Lee and Cailliau pitched Berners-Lee's ideas to the European Conference on Hypertext Technology in September 1990, but found no vendors who could appreciate his vision. Berners-Lee's breakthrough was to marry hypertext to the Internet. In his book Weaving The Web , he explains that he had repeatedly suggested to members of both technical communities that a marriage between the two technologies was possible. But, when no one took up his invitation, he finally assumed the project himself. In the process, he developed three essential technologies: a system of globally unique identifiers for resources on the Web and elsewhere, the universal document identifier (UDI), later known as uniform resource locator (URL); the publishing language Hypertext Markup Language (HTML); the Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP). [ 21 ] info.cern.ch, the first website, in 2025 With help from Cailliau he published a more formal proposal on 12 November 1990 to build a "hypertext project" called WorldWideWeb (abbreviated "W3") as a "web" of "hypertext documents" to be viewed by "browsers" using a client–server architecture . [ 22 ] [ 23 ] The proposal was modelled after the Standard Generalized Markup Language (SGML) reader Dynatext by Electronic Book Technology, a spin-off from the Institute for Research in Information and Scholarship at Brown University . The Dynatext system, licensed by CERN, was considered too expensive and had an inappropriate licensing policy for use in the general high energy physics community, namely a fee for each document and each document alteration. [ citation needed ] At this point HTML and HTTP had already been in development for about two months and the first web server was about a month from completing its first successful test. Berners-Lee's proposal estimated that a read-only Web would be developed within three months and that it would take six months to achieve "the creation of new links and new material by readers, [so that] authorship becomes universal" as well as "the automatic notification of a reader when new material of interest to him/her has become available". By December 1990, Berners-Lee and his work team had built all the tools necessary for a working Web: the HyperText Transfer Protocol (HTTP), the HyperText Markup Language (HTML), the first web browser (named WorldWideWeb , which was also a web editor ), the first web server (later known as CERN httpd ) and the first web site ( https://info.cern.ch/ ) containing the first web pages that described the project itself was published on 20 December 1990. [ 24 ] [ 25 ] The browser could access Usenet newsgroups and FTP files as well. A NeXT Computer was used by Berners-Lee as the web server and also to write the web browser. [ 26 ] Working with Berners-Lee at CERN, Nicola Pellow developed the first cross-platform web browser, the Line Mode Browser . [ 27 ] 1991–1994: The Web goes public, early growth [ edit ] Initial launch [ edit ] In January 1991, the first web servers outside CERN were switched on. On 6 August 1991, Berners-Lee published a short summary of the World Wide Web project on the newsgroup alt.hypertext , inviting collaborators. [ 28 ] Paul Kunz from the Stanford Linear Accelerator Center (SLAC) visited CERN in September 1991, and was captivated by the Web. He brought the NeXT software back to SLAC, where librarian Louise Addis adapted it for the VM/CMS operating system on the IBM mainframe as a way to host the SPIRES -HEP database and display SLAC's catalog of online documents. [ 29 ] [ 30 ] [ 31 ] [ 32 ] This was the first web server outside of Europe and the first in North America. [ 33 ] The World Wide Web had several differences from other hypertext systems available at the time. The Web required only unidirectional links rather than bidirectional ones, making it possible for someone to link to another resource without action by the owner of that resource. It also significantly reduced the difficulty of implementing web servers and browsers (in comparison to earlier systems), but in turn, presented the chronic problem of link rot . Early browsers [ edit ] The WorldWideWeb browser only ran on NeXTSTEP operating system. This shortcoming was discussed in January 1992, [ 34 ] and alleviated in early 1992 by the release of ViolaWWW , created by Pei-Yuan Wei , and later by Erwise , developed by students at the Helsinki University of Technology , and MidasWWW , developed by Tony Johnson at SLAC . [ 35 ] ViolaWWW was the recommended browser at CERN during this time. [ 36 ] Both programs ran on the X Window System for Unix . In 1992, the first tests between browsers on different platforms were concluded successfully between buildings 513 and 31 in CERN, between browsers on the NexT station and the X11-ported Mosaic browser. ViolaWWW became the recommended browser at CERN. To encourage use within CERN, Bernd Pollermann put the CERN telephone directory on the web—previously users had to log onto the mainframe in order to look up phone numbers. The Web was successful at CERN and spread to other scientific and academic institutions. Students at the University of Kansas adapted an existing text-only hypertext browser, Lynx , to access the web in 1993. [ 37 ] Lynx was available on Unix and DOS. From Gopher to the WWW [ edit ] Main article: Gopher (protocol) In the early 1990s, Internet-based projects such as Archie , Gopher , Wide Area Information Servers (WAIS), and the FTP Archive list attempted to create ways to organize distributed data. Gopher was a document browsing system for the Internet, released in 1991 by the University of Minnesota . Invented by Mark P. McCahill , it became the first commonly used hypertext interface to the Internet. While Gopher menu items were not sent as hypertext, they were rendered as hypertext links, that would allow the user to navigate to the resource by following the link. [ 38 ] In less than a year, there were hundreds of Gopher servers. [ 39 ] It offered a viable alternative to the World Wide Web in the early 1990s and the consensus was that Gopher would be the primary way that people would interact with the Internet. [ 40 ] [ 41 ] However, in 1993, the University of Minnesota declared that Gopher was proprietary and would have to be licensed. [ 39 ] In response, on 30 April 1993, CERN announced that the World Wide Web would be free to anyone, with no fees due, and released their code into the public domain. [ 42 ] [ 43 ] This made it possible to develop servers and clients independently and to add extensions without licensing restrictions. [ citation needed ] Coming two months after the announcement that the server implementation of the Gopher protocol was no longer free to use, this spurred the development of various browsers which precipitated a rapid shift away from Gopher. [ 44 ] By releasing Berners-Lee's invention for public use, CERN encouraged and enabled its widespread use. [ 45 ] Early websites intermingled links for both the HTTP web protocol and the Gopher protocol , which provided access to content through hypertext menus presented as a file system rather than through HTML files. Early Web users would navigate either by bookmarking popular directory pages or by consulting updated lists such as the NCSA "What's New" page. Some sites were also indexed by WAIS, enabling users to submit full-text searches similar to the capability later provided by search engines . After 1993 the World Wide Web saw many advances to indexing and ease of access through search engines, which often neglected Gopher and Gopherspace. As its popularity increased through ease of use, incentives for commercial investment in the Web also grew. By the middle of 1994, the Web was outcompeting Gopher and the other browsing systems for the Internet. [ 46 ] NCSA [ edit ] Main article: Mosaic (web browser) The National Center for Supercomputing Applications (NCSA) at the University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign (UIUC) established a website in November 1992. After Marc Andreessen , a student at UIUC, was shown ViolaWWW in late 1992, [ 47 ] he began work on Mosaic with another UIUC student Eric Bina , using funding from the High-Performance Computing and Communications Initiative , a US-federal research and development program initiated by US Senator Al Gore . [ 48 ] [ 49 ] [ 50 ] Andreessen and Bina released a Unix version of the browser in February 1993; Mac and Windows versions followed in August 1993. The browser gained popularity due to its strong support of integrated multimedia , and the authors' rapid response to user bug reports and recommendations for new features. [ 47 ] Historians generally agree that the 1993 introduction of the Mosaic web browser was a turning point for the World Wide Web. [ 51 ] [ 52 ] [ 53 ] Before the release of Mosaic in 1993, graphics were not commonly mixed with text in web pages, and the Web was less popular than older protocols such as Gopher and WAIS. Mosaic could display inline images [ 54 ] and submit forms [ 55 ] [ 56 ] for Windows, Macintosh and X-Windows. NCSA also developed HTTPd , a Unix web server that used the Common Gateway Interface to process forms and Server Side Includes for dynamic content. Both the client and server were free to use with no restrictions. [ 57 ] Mosaic was an immediate hit; [ 58 ] its graphical user interface allowed the Web to become by far the most popular protocol on the Internet. Within a year, web traffic surpassed Gopher's. [ 39 ] Wired declared that Mosaic made non-Internet online services obsolete, [ 59 ] and the Web became the preferred interface for accessing the Internet. [ citation needed ] Early growth [ edit ] The World Wide Web enabled the spread of information over the Internet through an easy-to-use and flexible format. It thus played an important role in popularising use of the Internet. [ 60 ] Although the two terms are sometimes conflated in popular use, World Wide Web is not synonymous with Internet . [ 61 ] The Web is an information space containing hyperlinked documents and other resources , identified by their URIs. [ 62 ] It is implemented as both client and server software using Internet protocols such as TCP/IP and HTTP . In keeping with its origins at CERN, early adopters of the Web were primarily university-based scientific departments or physics laboratories such as SLAC and Fermilab . By January 1993 there were fifty web servers across the world. [ 63 ] By October 1993 there were over five hundred servers online, including some notable websites . [ 64 ] Practical media distribution and streaming media over the Web was made possible by advances in data compression , due to the impractically high bandwidth requirements of uncompressed media. Following the introduction of the Web, several media formats based on discrete cosine transform (DCT) were introduced for practical media distribution and streaming over the Web, including the MPEG video format in 1991 and the JPEG image format in 1992. The high level of image compression made JPEG a good format for compensating slow Internet access speeds, typical in the age of dial-up Internet access . JPEG became the most widely used image format for the World Wide Web. A DCT variation, the modified discrete cosine transform (MDCT) algorithm, led to the development of MP3 , which was introduced in 1991 and became the first popular audio format on the Web. In 1992 the Computing and Networking Department of CERN, headed by David Williams, withdrew support of Berners-Lee's work. A two-page email sent by Williams stated that the work of Berners-