# Research memo: Who&#8217;s Afraid of Chinese Models? &#8211; Stratechery by Ben Thompson

Who s Afraid of Chinese Models? Stratechery by Ben Thompson Skip to content Who s Afraid of Chinese Models? Monday, July 20, 2026 Listen to Podcast Listen to this post : Log in to listen There s a story I tell about my first day in STRT-431 at Kellogg School of Management, the introductory class that every first-year MBA was required to take; I leafed through the readings and case studies and was dismayed that there weren t any tech companies on the docket. Me being me, I spoke to the professor after class wondering why, and was told that the goal of the course was not to necessarily learn about specific industries, but rather to uncover broadly applicable universal principles that could be applied to any company in any industry. I did not, as I usually tell the story, find this very satisfactory: to me the nature of tech, particularly the fact that software and distribution had zero marginal costs (and zero transaction costs), was something fundamentally different; putting in zeroes in formulas tends to wreak havoc! I soon realized, however, that that was my opportunity. The fundamental insight undergirding Aggregation Theory is that zero marginal costs leads to fundamentally different value chains than people once expected from the Internet: centralization and scale in a world where controlling demand mattered more than distributing supply. What is fascinating about AI, however, is the extent to which those old universal principles are coming back to the forefront. That was never more apparent than this past weekend, when arguments raged on X about the implications of Kimi K3, another open weights model out of China, approaching the state-of-the-art in terms of capabilities. The long and short of it is this: marginal costs are back in a big way, both in terms of short-term implications of state-of-the-art free models, and in terms of the long-term structure of the industry. COGS Versus R D One of the most common misconceptions undergirding discussion of open weights models is that they are cheaper — free, even. After all, you can just download the weights, and skip the time and expense and capabilities necessary to create your own model. That is, of course, true, but the free in this case is a reference to the amount you need to spend on research and development; R D is a fixed expense that is independent of the revenue you generate. If you spend $1 million in R D, it doesn t matter if you do $100 thousand in revenue or $100 million; you still spent $1 million on R D (it does, of course, impact your profitability). What is related to revenue is COGS — cost of goods sold — and COGS is real for AI in a way it hasn t been for software for a very long time. Specifically, running inference on a model — whether that model be Kimi or Fable — costs money, and the amount of money an AI provider spends on inference is, at least in most business models, directly correlated to revenue. To reuse the above example, generating $100 million versus $100 thousan

(read from: https://stratechery.com/2026/whos-afraid-of-chinese-models/)

---
source: fetch_and_read
