# Research memo: GitHub - janestreet/incremental: A library for incremental computations · GitHub

GitHub - janestreet/incremental: A library for incremental computations · GitHub Skip to content You signed in with another tab or window. Reload to refresh your session. You signed out in another tab or window. Reload to refresh your session. You switched a Uh oh! There was an error while loading. Please reload this page . janestreet / incremental Public Notifications You must be signed in to change notification settings Fork 72 Star 1.1k master Branches Tags Go to file Code Open more actions menu Folders and files Name Name Last commit message Last commit date Latest commit History 174 Commits 174 Commits doc doc memoize memoize skeleton skeleton src-debug src-debug src src step_function step_function test-debug test-debug test test .gitignore .gitignore .ocamlformat .ocamlformat CHANGES.md CHANGES.md CONTRIBUTING.md CONTRIBUTING.md LICENSE.md LICENSE.md Makefile Makefile README.org README.org dune dune dune-project dune-project incremental.opam incremental.opam View all files Repository files navigation Incremental is a library that gives you a way of building complex computations that can update efficiently in response to their inputs changing, inspired by the work of Umut Acar et. al. on self-adjusting computations. Incremental can be useful in a number of applications, including: Building large calculations (of the kind you might build into a spreadsheet) that can react efficiently to changing data. Constructing views in GUI applications that can incorporate new data efficiently. Computing derived data while guaranteeing that the derived data stays in sync with the source data, for instance filtering or inversing a mapping. You can find detailed documentation of the library and how to use it in incremental/src/incremental_intf.ml . You can also find an informal introduction to the library in this blog post and this video . About A library for incremental computations Resources Readme License MIT license Contributing Contributing Uh oh! There was an error while loading. Please reload this page . Activity Custom properties Stars 1.1k stars Watchers 31 watching Forks 72 forks Report repository Releases 18 tags Packages 0 Uh oh! There was an error while loading. Please reload this page . Uh oh! There was an error while loading. Please reload this page . Contributors Uh oh! There was an error while loading. Please reload this page . Languages OCaml 99.9% Other 0.1% You can’t perform that action at this time.

(read from: https://github.com/janestreet/incremental)

---
source: fetch_and_read
