# Research memo: Running DOOM on our Custom CPU and Going Viral | Armaan Gomes

Running DOOM on our Custom CPU and Going Viral | Armaan Gomes Armaan Gomes, Infrastructure ↻ ☀ AGI-INDEX REV A Running DOOM on our Custom CPU and Going Viral July 20, 2026 ← Blog DOOM # DOOM Doom is a video game made by id Software that released in 1993. It was a revolution in gaming that spread across the world and defined the modern FPS. Its popularity has given rise to the saying Doom can run on anything . To prove this point Doom ha been ported to almost everything, from microcontrollers, to toasters, and even bacteria. Two weeks ago we successfully ran(crawled) Doom on a CPU we built from scratch (and then posted a video that got a few million views). To be honest, I still can t believe it. What did we really do though? Well, we designed a custom CPU at the logic gate level, connected it to peripherals, adapted the DOOM source code to run on our machine, and deployed it onto an FPGA to run in real time. Before running Doom, we had only run simple programs that we had written, like Pong and Mandelbrot sets. Now we can run full published games, but getting here was a rather rocky road. The Requirements ​ Starting off with our pipelined design in this post , we set our sights on more complex programs. Pong was great, but it was from the 70s. We wanted to jump into the 90s. However, there were two big problems in our way: memory and speed. Larger programs need larger memory and our design could only utilize the FPGA s BRAM, which was less than a megabyte. The basic shareware for Doom ( doom1.wad ) is 14 megabytes. That doesn t even include the memory required to run the program, just to store it. The second barrier is speed. While Doom is a breeze for modern PCs, it s a slog for our CPU. We simply need to go faster. Thus, Liam and I decided to pursue each problem individually. Liam is currently laying the groundwork for out-of-order processing which will enable far greater parallelism and pipeline fulfillment tricks. I took on memory integration. While it may sound simple: just hook up an extra memory chip, the reality is far more complicated. Memory Integration ​ In our original CPU design, memory was very clean. FPGA BRAM has 1 cycle latency and is very simple to interface with. This consistency meant that our pipelined processor never needed to stall for memory because the consistent delay was directly incorporated into our pipeline. Furthermore BRAM is granular, we can read and edit the memory word by word. DDR3 memory on the other hand is slow, has variable latency, and wide bus widths. This makes memory operations more complicated and less predictable. It also is a lot slower. If every memory operation was sent to the DDR3 memory, the CPU would slow to a crawl. This is where cache comes in. Programs don t use all of the memory at all times, so the cache stores active regions of memory in BRAM to increase access speed. A well optimized cache can almost eliminate the added latency due to DDR3. The Design ​ This version of the CPU uses a rela

(read from: https://www.armaangomes.com/blogs/doom/)

---
source: fetch_and_read
