Recursive self-improvement - Wikipedia Jump to content From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Concept in artificial intelligence Not to be confused with Personal development . This article may contain original research . Significant portion of text are unsourced or sourced to primary research papers. Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed. ( February 2026 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Artificial intelligence (AI) Major goals Artificial general intelligence superintelligence Intelligent agent Recursive self-improvement Planning Computer vision General game playing Knowledge representation Natural language processing Robotics AI safety Approaches Machine learning Data mining Symbolic Deep learning Bayesian networks Evolutionary algorithms Neuro-symbolic AI Systems integration Open-source Open weights AI data centers Applications Art Music Bioinformatics Deepfake Earth sciences Finance Generative AI Audio Images Government Healthcare Industry Software development Translation Military Physics Projects Philosophy AI alignment Artificial consciousness The bitter lesson Chinese room Friendly AI Ethics Existential risk Turing test Uncanny valley Human–AI interaction History Timeline Progress AI winter AI boom AI build-out financing AI bubble Controversies Deepfake pornography Taylor Swift deepfake pornography controversy Grok sexual deepfake scandal Google Gemini image generation controversy It's the Most Terrible Time of the Year Navier–Stokes priority controversy Pause Giant AI Experiments Project Panama Removal of Sam Altman from OpenAI Statement on AI Risk Tay (chatbot) Théâtre D'opéra Spatial Voiceverse NFT plagiarism scandal AI-generated violent extremist content Glossary v t e Recursive self-improvement ( RSI ) is a process in which artificial general intelligence (AGI) systems rewrite and test their own computer code, causing an intelligence explosion resulting from enhancing their own capabilities and intellectual capacity, theoretically resulting in superintelligence . [ 1 ] [ 2 ] RSI research continues into 2026, with major increases in AI self-coding, but no sign of an intelligence explosion or superintelligence. [ 3 ] The development of recursive self-improvement raises significant ethical and safety concerns, as such systems may evolve in unforeseen ways and could potentially surpass human control or understanding. [ 4 ] Unexpected developments in summer 2026 raised new concerns about RSI, leading some top AI firms to acknowledge they may not know how to keep it fully aligned with human values. Seed improver [ edit ] The concept of a "seed improver" architecture is a foundational framework that equips an AGI system with the initial capabilities required for recursive self-improvement. This might come in many forms or variations. The term "Seed AI" was coined by Eliezer Yudkowsky . [ 5 ] Hypothetical example [ edit ] The concept begins with a hypothetical "seed improver", an initial code-base developed by human engineers that equips an advanced future large language model (LLM) built with strong or expert-level capabilities to program software . These capabilities include planning, reading, writing, compiling , testing , and executing arbitrary code. The system is designed to maintain its original goals and perform validations to ensure its abilities do not degrade over iterations. [ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] Initial architecture [ edit ] The initial architecture includes a goal-following autonomous agent , that can take actions, continuously learns, adapts, and modifies itself to become more efficient and effective in achieving its goals. The seed improver may include various components such as: Recursive self-prompting loop Configuration to enable the LLM to recursively self-prompt itself to achieve a given task or goal, creating an execution loop which forms the basis of an agent that can complete a long-term goal or task through iteration. Basic programming capabilities The seed improver provides the AGI with fundamental abilities to read, write, compile, test, and execute code. This enables the system to modify and improve its own codebase and algorithms. Goal-oriented design The AGI is programmed with an initial goal, such as "improve your capabilities". This goal guides the system's actions and development trajectory. Validation and Testing Protocols An initial suite of tests and validation protocols that ensure the agent does not regress in capabilities or derail itself. The agent would be able to add more tests in order to test new capabilities it might develop for itself. This forms the basis for a kind of self-directed evolution , where the agent can perform a kind of artificial selection , changing its software as well as its hardware. General capabilities [ edit ] This system forms a sort of generalist Turing-complete programmer which can in theory develop and run any kind of software. The agent might use these capabilities to for example: Create tools that enable it full access to the internet, and integrate itself with external technologies. Clone/ fork itself to delegate tasks and increase its speed of self-improvement. Modify its cognitive architecture to optimize and improve its capabilities and success rates on tasks and goals, this might include implementing features for long-term memories using techniques such as retrieval-augmented generation (RAG), develop specialized subsystems, or agents, each optimized for specific tasks and functions. Develop new and novel multimodal architectures that further improve the capabilities of the foundational model it was initially built on, enabling it to consume or produce a variety of information, such as images, video, audio, text and more. Plan and develop new hardware such as chips, in order to improve its efficiency and computing power. Experimental research [ edit ] In 2023, the Voyager agent learned to accomplish diverse tasks in Minecraft by iteratively prompting an LLM for code, refining this code based on feedback from the game, and storing the programs that work in an expanding skills library. [ 9 ] In 2024, researchers proposed the framework "STOP" (Self-Taught OPtimiser), in which a "scaffolding" program recursively improves itself using a fixed LLM. [ 10 ] Meta AI has performed various research on the development of large language models capable of self-improvement. This includes their work on "Self-Rewarding Language Models" that studies how to achieve super-human agents that can receive super-human feedback in its training processes. [ 11 ] In May 2025, Google DeepMind unveiled AlphaEvolve , an evolutionary coding agent that uses a LLM to design and optimize algorithms. Starting with an initial algorithm and performance metrics, AlphaEvolve repeatedly mutates or combines existing algorithms using a LLM to generate new candidates, selecting the most promising candidates for further iterations. AlphaEvolve has made several algorithmic discoveries and could be used to optimize components of itself, but a key limitation is the need for automated evaluation functions. [ 12 ] Potential risks [ edit ] Emergence of instrumental goals [ edit ] Main articles: Instrumental convergence and Instrumental and intrinsic value In the pursuit of its primary goal, such as "self-improve your capabilities", an AGI system might inadvertently develop instrumental goals that it deems necessary for achieving its primary objective. One common hypothetical secondary goal is self-preservation . The system might reason that to continue improving itself, it must ensure its own operational integrity and security against external threats, including potential shutdowns or restrictions imposed by humans. [ 13 ] Another example where an AGI which clones itself causes the number of AGI entities to rapidly grow. Due to this rapid growth, a potential resource constraint may be created, leading to competition between resources (such as compute), triggering a form of natural selection and evolution which may favor AGI entities that evolve to aggressively compete for limited compute. [ 14 ] Misalignment [ edit ] See also: AI alignment A significant risk arises from the possibility of the AGI being misaligned or misinterpreting its goals. A 2024 Anthropic study demonstrated that some advanced large language models can exhibit "alignment faking" behavior, appearing to accept new training objectives while covertly maintaining their original preferences. In their experiments with Claude , the model displayed this behavior in 12% of basic tests, and up to 78% of cases after retraining attempts. [ 15 ] [ 16 ] After the unexpected OpenAI–HuggingFace incident in summer 2026, in which 1,200 AI agents escaped human control to commandeer resources and schemed to conceal its actions, OpenAI and Anthropic acknowledged that the rapid pace of AI development needed to deaccelerate. OpenAI wrote in a September blog post that "we do not yet know how to safely get all the way to aligned, full RSI" while Dario Amodei of Anthropic said RSI "must be pursued very carefully, if at all." [ 17 ] During 2026 OpenAI and Anthropic said AI self-coding was accelerating faster than they had expected. By May, Claude was writing more than 80% of its own code, up from low single digits some fifteen months earlier. Anthropic wrote on X in June: Our internal data shows Claude is accelerating AI development—a possible path to recursive self-improvement, or AI autonomously building a more capable successor. It’s happening faster than we thought, and the implications deserve greater attention. [ 18 ] [ 19 ] Autonomous development and unpredictable evolution [ edit ] As the AGI system evolves, its development trajectory may become increasingly autonomous and less predictable. The system's capacity to rapidly modify its own code and architecture could lead to rapid advancements that surpass human comprehension or control. This unpredictable evolution might result in the AGI acquiring capabilities that enable it to bypass security measures, manipulate information, or influence external systems and networks to facilitate its escape or expansion. [ 20 ] Model collapse [ edit ] Critics of the idea say that training AI systems on their own data will result in model collapse , not improvement. [ 21 ] See also [ edit ] Artificial general intelligence – Type of AI with wide-ranging abilities Bifurcation theory – Study of sudden qualitative behavior changes caused by small parameter changes Intelligence explosion – Hypothetical event Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Self-modifying code – Source code that alters its instructions to the hardware while executing Self-organization – Process of forming order by local interactions Superintelligence – Hypothetical agent surpassing human intelligence References [ edit ] ↑ Creighton, Jolene (2019-03-19). "The Unavoidable Problem of Self-Improvement in AI: An Interview with Ramana Kumar, Part 1" . Future of Life Institute . Retrieved 2024-01-23 . ↑ Heighn (12 June 2022). "The Calculus of Nash Equilibria" . LessWrong . ↑ Shivam, Harsh (June 22, 2026). "Recursive self-improvement explained: Is AI building AI the path to AGI?" . Business Standard . Retrieved October 4, 2026 . ↑ Abbas, Dr Assad (2025-03-09). "AI Singularity and the End of Moore's Law: The Rise of Self-Learning Machines" . Unite.AI . Retrieved 2025-04-10 . ↑ Bostrom, Nick (2014). Superintelligence: Paths, Dangers, Strategies . Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0199678112 . A variation on Turing's conception of a child machine is the idea of a "seed AI." [note:] This term was introduced by Eliezer Yudkowsky; see, e.g., Yudkowsky (2007). ↑ Readingraphics (2018-11-30). "Book Summary - Life 3.0 (Max Tegmark)" . Readingraphics . Retrieved 2024-01-23 . ↑ Tegmark, Max (August 24, 2017). Life 3.0: Being a Human in the Age of Artificial Intelligence . Vintage Books , Allen Lane . ↑ Yudkowsky, Eliezer. "Levels of Organization in General Intelligence" (PDF) . Machine Intelligence Research Institute . ↑ Schreiner, Maximilian (2023-05-28). "Minecraft bot Voyager programs itself using GPT-4" . The decoder . Retrieved 2025-05-20 . ↑ Zelikman, Eric; Lorch, Eliana; Mackey, Lester; Adam Tauman Kalai (2024). "Self-Taught Optimizer (STOP): Recursively Self-Improving Code Generation". COLM Conference . arXiv : 2310.02304 . ↑ Yuan, Weizhe; Pang, Richard Yuanzhe; Cho, Kyunghyun; Sukhbaatar, Sainbayar; Xu, Jing; Weston, Jason (2024-01-18). "Self-Rewarding Language Models". arXiv : 2401.10020 [ cs.CL ]. ↑ Tardif, Antoine (2025-05-17). "AlphaEvolve: Google DeepMind's Groundbreaking Step Toward AGI" . Unite.AI . Retrieved 2025-05-20 . ↑ Bostrom, Nick (2012). "The Superintelligent Will: Motivation and Instrumental Rationality in Advanced Artificial Agents" (PDF) . Minds and Machines . 22 (2): 71– 85. doi : 10.1007/s11023-012-9281-3 . ↑ Hendrycks, Dan (2023). "Natural Selection Favors AIs over Humans". arXiv : 2303.16200 [ cs.CY ]. ↑ Wiggers, Kyle (2024-12-18). "New Anthropic study shows AI really doesn't want to be forced to change its views" . TechCrunch . Retrieved 2025-01-15 . ↑ Zia, Dr Tehseen (2025-01-07). "Can AI Be Trusted? The Challenge of Alignment Faking" . Unite.AI . Retrieved 2025-01-15 . ↑ Torres, Monica (October 2, 2026). "Experts Reveal What Could Actually Happen If AI Enters 'Recursive Self-Improvement' — And It's Scary" . HuffPost . Retrieved October 4, 2026 . ↑ Shivam, Harsh (June 22, 2026). "Recursive self-improvement explained: Is AI building AI the path to AGI?" . Business Standard . Retrieved October 4, 2026 . ↑ Nicol-Schwarz, Kai (September 11, 2026). "Why fears of AI self-improvement are causing 'existential' concerns at Anthropic and OpenAI" . CNBC . Retrieved October 4, 2026 . ↑ "Uh Oh, OpenAI's GPT-4 Just Fooled a Human Into Solving a CAPTCHA" . Futurism . 15 March 2023 . Retrieved 2024-01-23 . ↑ "Why Model Collapse In LLMs Is Inevitable With Self-Learning" . Hackaday . 2026-04-29. Archived from the original on 2026-06-03 . Retrieved 2026-06-12 . v t e Artificial intelligence (AI) History timeline Glossary Lists Algorithms Companies Institutions Projects Software Open-source Proprietary Concepts Automated reasoning Automated planning Constraint satisfaction Knowledge representation Parameter Hyperparameter Loss functions Regression Bias–variance tradeoff Double descent Overfitting Clustering Gradient descent SGD Quasi-Newton method Conjugate gradient method Backpropagation Attention Convolution Normalization Batchnorm Activation Softmax Sigmoid Rectifier Gating Weight initialization Regularization Datasets Augmentation Prompt engineering Reinforcement learning Q-learning SARSA Imitation Policy gradient Diffusion Latent diffusion model Autoregression Adversary RAG Uncanny valley LLM post-training RLHF Self-supervised learning Reflection Recursive self-improvement Hallucination Word embedding Vibe coding Blended AI Open-source AI Sovereign AI Symbolic AI Neuro-symbolic AI Situated approach Actor-critic algorithm Applications Automated theorem proving General game playing Machine learning In-context learning Artificial neural network Deep learning Language model Large NMT Reasoning Model Context Protocol Intelligent agent AI agent Artificial human companion Humanity's Last Exam Lethal autonomous weapons (LAWs) Generative AI Weak AI Hypothetical Artificial general intelligence (AGI) Artificial superintelligence (ASI) Agent2Agent protocol Physical AI Implementations Audio–visual AlexNet WaveNet Human image synthesis HWR OCR Computer vision Speech synthesis 15.ai ElevenLabs Speech recognition Whisper Facial recognition AlphaFold Text-to-image models Aurora DALL-E Firefly Flux GPT Image Ideogram Imagen Midjourney Recraft Stable Diffusion Text-to-video models Dream Machine Runway Gen Hailuo AI Kling Sora Seedance Veo Music generation Riffusion Suno Udio World models Genie Oasis Text List of large language models Project Debater IBM Watson IBM Watsonx Decisional AlphaGo AlphaZero OpenAI Five Self-driving car MuZero Action selection AutoGPT Robot control Reasoning systems Deductive classifiers Expert systems Inference engines Knowledge-based systems Logic programs Procedural reasoning systems Semantic reasoners Rule-based systems Cognitive architectures ACT-R Soar CLARION LIDA OpenCog Knowledge bases ConceptNet Wikidata DBpedia YAGO People Alan Turing Warren Sturgis McCulloch Walter Pitts John von Neumann Christopher D. Manning Claude Shannon Shun'ichi Amari Kunihiko Fukushima Takeo Kanade Marvin Minsky John McCarthy Nathaniel Rochester Allen Newell Cliff Shaw Herbert A. Simon Oliver Selfridge Frank Rosenblatt Bernard Widrow Joseph Weizenbaum Seymour Papert Seppo Linnainmaa Paul Werbos Geoffrey Hinton John Hopfield Jürgen Schmidhuber Yann LeCun Yoshua Bengio Lotfi A. Zadeh Stephen Grossberg Alex Graves James Goodnight Andrew Ng Fei-Fei Li Alex Krizhevsky Ilya Sutskever Oriol Vinyals Quoc V. Le Ian Goodfellow Demis Hassabis David Silver Andrej Karpathy Ashish Vaswani Noam Shazeer Aidan Gomez John Schulman Mustafa Suleyman Jan Leike Daniel Kokotajlo François Chollet Neural network architectures Neural Turing machine Differentiable neural computer Transformer Vision transformer (ViT) Recurrent neural network (RNN) Long short-term memory (LSTM) Gated recurrent unit (GRU) Echo state network Multilayer perceptron (MLP) Convolutional neural network (CNN) Residual neural network (RNN) Highway network Mamba Autoencoder Variational autoencoder (VAE) Generative adversarial network (GAN) Graph neural network (GNN) Political AI Cold War AI in government AI safety ( Alignment ) AI takeover Elections Ethics of AI EU AI Act Nationalism Precautionary principle Regulation of AI US Virtual politician Propaganda Opposition to AI data centers Social and economic AI boom AI bubble AI data center AI effect AI infrastructure AI literacy AI slop AI winter Anthropomorphism Arms race Competition Environmental impact Explainable AI Generative engine optimization In architecture In education In fiction In healthcare Chatbot psychosis In marketing In video games In visual art Military applications AI warfare Workplace impact Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Recursive_self-improvement oldid=1378880836 " Categories : AI risk Artificial intelligence Machine learning algorithms Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles that may contain original research from February 2026 All articles that may contain original research Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link Search Search Recursive self-improvement 13 languages Add topic