Recreational mathematics - Wikipedia Jump to content From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Form of entertainment in mathematics John Conway 's game of life breeder-pattern animation . Recreational mathematics is mathematics carried out for recreation (entertainment) rather than as a strictly research-and-application-based professional activity or as a part of a student's formal education. The Mathematical Association of America (MAA) has seventeen Special Interest Groups which includes a recreational math group called SIGMAA-Rec. The SIGMAA-Rec website defines recreational mathematics as, "...a broad term that covers many different areas including games , puzzles , magic, art, and more." [ 1 ] Although it is not necessarily limited to being an endeavor for amateurs , many topics in this field require no knowledge of advanced mathematics. [ 2 ] Mathematical competitions (such as those sponsored by mathematical associations ) are also categorized under recreational mathematics. Areas of mathematics [ edit ] See also: Category:Fields of mathematics The Knight's tour , a mathematical chess problem , animated. Some of the more well-known topics in recreational mathematics are Rubik's Cubes , magic squares , fractals , logic puzzles and mathematical chess problems , but this area of mathematics includes the aesthetics and culture of mathematics, peculiar or amusing stories and coincidences about mathematics , and the personal lives of mathematicians . History [ edit ] 1200s [ edit ] How many pairs of rabbits are created by one pair in one year. /i> on it. ","txt":" A scan of the Liber Abaci with the problem How many pairs of rabbits are created by one pair in one year. on it."}]]}'> A page of Fibonacci's Liber Abaci from the Biblioteca Nazionale di Firenze showing (in box on right) 13 entries of the Fibonacci sequence. The Liber Abaci or Liber Abbaci was written by Leonardo of Pisa , posthumously known as Fibonacci . Multiple math puzzles are presented with one titled, How Many Pairs of Rabbits Are Created by One Pair in One Year. [ 3 ] 1700s [ edit ] Choi Seok-jeong (Korean: 최석정; Hanja: 崔錫鼎; 1646–1715) made the earliest known form of latin squares in his book Gusuryak (Koo-Soo-Ryak: Korean: 구수략; Hanja: 九數略). [ 4 ] The mathematical-puzzle game Sudoku created in the 1970s is a special case of Latin squares. 1800s [ edit ] The Lady's and Gentleman's Diary was a recreational math magazine created by Wesley S. B. Woolhouse which ran from 1704-1871 [ 5 ] . 1900s [ edit ] Howard Garns created the first Sudoku published for the Dell Magazines in May 1979. [ 6 ] Forms [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see Category:Mathematics and culture . Numeracy is a requirement for recreational activities, from knowing the range of people who can participate at a time to using specific areas of knowledge to participate at all. Hobbiests enjoy finding the mathematical sides of the world and creating enjoyable experiences with mathematics. Books [ edit ] Different from a singular math word problem mathematical fiction books may involve multiple problems which further build upon each other as the story progresses. One example is a children's-book series called Usborne Puzzle Adventures [ 7 ] . Throughout the book, there are puzzles which you must solve for the next part of the story to make sense . Clues and evidence lurk in the words and the pictures...If you get stuck, there are extra clues to help you...They are printed in a secret way, so you will have to work out how to read them first. — Karen Dolby, Usborne Puzzle Adventures: Danger at Demon's Cove, About this Book Games [ edit ] Young people playing a Mancala-variant called Igisoro , a traditional Rwandan game. Mathematical games are multiplayer games whose rules, strategies, and outcomes can be studied and explained using mathematics . The players of the game may not need to use explicit mathematics in order to play mathematical games. For example, Mancala is studied in the mathematical field of combinatorial game theory , but no mathematics is necessary in order to play it. Mathemagics [ edit ] Mathematical explanation of the Twenty-One Card Trick : The cards are dealt into three piles which are accumulated with the pile containing the target card (shaded yellow and labelled with the step number) put in the middle. This is done three times, the middle card (*) is the one in all chosen piles. Magic tricks based on mathematical principles can produce self-working but surprising effects. For instance, a mathemagician might use the combinatorial properties of a deck of playing cards to guess a volunteer's selected card, or Hamming codes to identify whether a volunteer is lying. [ 8 ] Music [ edit ] Mathematics is used to create and understand music. There are subgenres of music which are directly inspired by mathematics, such as math rock . Math and music examples Audio About Genre Fractal Study -1 "...Fractal Study no. 1 is a soft ambient piece created by a nonlinear function." - User:Rozencrantz~commonswiki ambient Puzzles [ edit ] Clumsy wagon, a puzzle that has as its core a mathematical problem that seeks to verify if it is possible for a wagon with only two points of contact to pass through a winding rail, available on the collection of Matemateca IME-USP. Mathematical puzzles require mathematics in order to solve them. They have specific rules, as do multiplayer games , but mathematical puzzles do not usually involve competition between two or more players. Instead, in order to solve such a puzzle , the solver must find a solution that satisfies the given conditions. Logic puzzles and classical ciphers are common examples of mathematical puzzles. Cellular automata and fractals are also considered mathematical puzzles, even though the solver only interacts with them by providing a set of initial conditions. As they often include or require game-like features or thinking, mathematical puzzles are sometimes also called mathematical games. These games can be done through different forms of media, such as board games, books, comics, and video games. Other activities [ edit ] Origami-inspired engineering to discover how to make self-folding structures. [ 9 ] Other curiosities and pastimes of non-trivial mathematical interest include: patterns in juggling the sometimes profound algorithmic and geometrical characteristics of origami patterns and process in creating string figures such as Cat's cradles , etc. fractal-generating software Mathematics and art Relationship with the sciences [ edit ] A video from the Wikibook, ' Physics Explained Through a Video Game .' The academic field of mathematics is a core-component for others, such as chemistry and physics . Whenever there is recreational play in those academic fields they include recreational mathematics as well. Distributers [ edit ] Recreational mathematics is shared in similar ways as other hobbies. Individual enthusiasts and math-related organizations will make and share what they have created and/or learned. People [ edit ] Prominent practitioners and advocates of recreational mathematics have included professional and amateur mathematicians : Full name Last name Born Died Nationality Description Alcuin of York Alcuin 735 804 English Clergyman, scholar, and teacher; author of Propositiones ad Acuendos Juvenes . Lewis Carroll (Charles Dodgson) Carroll 1832 1898 English Mathematician, puzzlist and Anglican deacon best known as the author of Alice in Wonderland and Through the Looking-Glass . Sam Loyd Loyd 1841 1911 American Chess problem composer and author, described as "America's greatest puzzlist " by Martin Gardner . [ 10 ] W.W. Rouse Ball Ball 1850 1925 British Author of Mathematical Recreations and Essays , continuously published since 1892. Henry Dudeney Dudeney 1857 1930 English Civil servant described as England's "greatest puzzlist". [ 11 ] Yakov Perelman Perelman 1882 1942 Russian Author of many popular science and mathematics books, including Mathematics Can Be Fun. J.A.H. Hunter Hunter 1902 1986 British Author of Fun with Figures . D. R. Kaprekar Kaprekar 1905 1986 Indian Discovered several results in number theory , described several classes of natural numbers including the Kaprekar , harshad and self numbers, and discovered the Kaprekar's constant Martin Gardner Gardner 1914 2010 American Popular mathematics and science writer; author of Mathematical Games , a long-running Scientific American column. Raymond Smullyan Smullyan 1919 2017 American Logician; author of many logic puzzle books including " To Mock a Mockingbird ". Joseph Madachy Madachy 1927 2014 American Long-time editor of Journal of Recreational Mathematics , author of Mathematics on Vacation. Solomon W. Golomb Golomb 1932 2016 American Mathematician and engineer, best known as the inventor of polyominoes . Noboyuki Yoshigahara Yoshigahara 1936 2004 Japanese Japan's most celebrated inventor, collector, solver, and communicator of puzzles. Vladimir Arnold Arnold 1937 2010 Russian Prolific mathematician and educator; author of Problems for children from 5 to 15 . John Horton Conway Conway 1937 2020 English Mathematician and inventor of Conway's Game of Life , co-author of Winning Ways , an analysis of many mathematical games . Lee Sallows Sallows 1944 English Invented geomagic squares , golygons , and self-enumerating sentences . Ian Stewart Stewart 1945 British Mathematician and author; his work includes the Mathematical Recreations column for Scientific American and numerous books on recreational mathematics. Peter Winkler Winkler 1946 American Mathematician and author of several books on recreational mathematics. Online blogs, podcasts, and YouTube channels [ edit ] There are many blogs and audio or video series devoted to recreational mathematics. Among the notable are the following: The Breaking Math Podcast - Episode 001 Cut-the-Knot by Alexander Bogomolny Futility Closet by Greg Ross Mathologer by Burkard Polster Numberphile by Brady Haran Stand-Up Maths by Matt Parker MindYourDecisions by Presh Talwalkar The videos of Vi Hart Publications [ edit ] The journal Eureka published by the mathematical society of the University of Cambridge is one of the oldest publications in recreational mathematics. It has been published 60 times since 1939 and authors have included many famous mathematicians and scientists such as Martin Gardner , John Conway , Roger Penrose , Ian Stewart , Timothy Gowers , Stephen Hawking and Paul Dirac . The Journal of Recreational Mathematics was the largest publication on this topic from its founding in 1968 until 2014 when it ceased publication. Mathematical Games (1956 to 1981) was the title of a long-running Scientific American column on recreational mathematics by Martin Gardner . He inspired several generations of mathematicians and scientists through his interest in mathematical recreations. "Mathematical Games" was succeeded by 25 " Metamagical Themas " columns (1981-1983), a similarly distinguished, but shorter-running, column by Douglas Hofstadter , then by 78 "Mathematical Recreations" and "Computer Recreations" columns (1984 to 1991) by A. K. Dewdney , then by 96 "Mathematical Recreations" columns (1991 to 2001) by Ian Stewart , and most recently "Puzzling Adventures" by Dennis Shasha . The Recreational Mathematics Magazine , published by the Ludus Association , is electronic and semiannual, and focuses on results that provide amusing, witty but nonetheless original and scientifically profound mathematical nuggets. The issues are published in the exact moments of the equinox. See also [ edit ] List of recreational number theory topics Mathematics of paper folding ( origami ) References [ edit ] ↑ About SIGMAA-Rec , MAA , 2018, archived from the original on 2026-04-16 ↑ Kulkarni, D. Enjoying Math: Learning Problem Solving With KenKen Puzzles Archived 2013-08-01 at the Wayback Machine , a free and online-textbook for teaching with KenKen Puzzles. ↑ Abaci, Liber (2002), "12", Fibonacci's Liber Abaci A Translation into Modern English of Leonardo Pisano's Book of Calculation , translated by Sigler, Laurence, Springer , pp. 404– 405, ISBN 978-0-387-95419-6 ↑ O'Connor, J J; Robertson, E F (March 2022), Choi Seok-jeong , Scotland : School of Mathematics and Statistics at the University of St Andrews , archived from the original on 2026-07-28 , retrieved 2026-08-06 , a free and online biography-article. ↑ Italia, Iona (2005), The Rise of Literary Journalism in the Eighteenth Century: Anxious Employment , vol. 3 of Routledge Studies in Eighteen-Century Literature (illustrated ed.), USA and Canada: Psychology Press, p. 5, ISBN 9780415343923 ↑ Pegg Jr., Ed (2005-09-15), Sudoku Variations , MAA , archived from the original on 2026-08-03 , retrieved 2026-08-06 , a free online article on the history of Sudoku. ↑ Dolby, Karen, Danger At Demon's Cove , Usborne Puzzle Adventures, Tulsa, Oklahoma: EDC Publishing, ISBN 0746001797 ↑ Teixeira, Ricardo (2020). Mathemagics: A Magical Journey through Advanced Mathematics . USA: World Scientific. ISBN 9789811214509 . ↑ Liu, Xiang; Gattas, Joseph M; Chen, Yan (2016-11-10), One-DOF Superimposed Rigid Origami with Multiple States , vol. 6, Scientific Reports , doi : 10.1038/srep36883 , PMC 5103280 , PMID 27830732 , archived from the original on 2025-03-08 – via nature ↑ Loyd, Sam (1959). Mathematical Puzzles of Sam Loyd (selected and edited by Martin Gardner ), Dover Publications Inc., p. xi, ISBN 0-486-20498-7 ↑ Newing, Angela (1994), "Henry Ernest Dudeney: Britain's Greatest Puzzlist", in Guy, Richard K. ; Woodrow, Robert E. (eds.), The Lighter Side of Mathematics: Proceedings of the Eugène Strens Memorial Conference on Recreational Mathematics and Its History , Cambridge University Press, pp. 294– 301, ISBN 9780883855164 . Further reading [ edit ] W. W. Rouse Ball and H.S.M. Coxeter (1987). Mathematical Recreations and Essays , Thirteenth Edition, Dover. ISBN 0-486-25357-0 . Henry E. Dudeney (1967). 536 Puzzles and Curious Problems. Charles Scribner's sons . ISBN 0-684-71755-7 . Sam Loyd (1959. 2 Vols.). in Martin Gardner: The Mathematical Puzzles of Sam Loyd. Dover. OCLC 5720955 . Raymond M. Smullyan (1991). The Lady or the Tiger? And Other Logic Puzzles . Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-286136-0 . External links [ edit ] Look up recreational mathematics in Wiktionary, the free dictionary. Wikibooks has more on the topic of: Recreational mathematics Recreational Mathematics from MathWorld at Wolfram Research v t e Major mathematics areas History Timeline Future Lists Glossary Foundations Category theory Information theory Mathematical logic Philosophy of mathematics Set theory Type theory Algebra Abstract Commutative Elementary Field theory Group theory Homological Linear Analysis Calculus Real analysis Complex analysis Differential equations Functional analysis Harmonic analysis Measure theory Discrete Combinatorics Discrete geometry Graph theory Geometry Algebraic Affine Analytic Arithmetic Complex Computational Convex Differential Discrete Euclidean Finite Information Projective Number theory Algebraic Analytic Arithmetic Diophantine geometry Topology General Algebraic Differential Geometric Homotopy theory Applied Engineering mathematics Mathematical biology Mathematical chemistry Mathematical economics Mathematical finance Mathematical geology Mathematical linguistics Mathematical physics Mathematical psychology Mathematical sociology Mathematical statistics Probability Statistics Systems science Control theory Game theory Operations research Computational Computer science Theory of computation Computational complexity theory Numerical analysis Optimization Computer algebra Related topics Mathematicians lists Informal mathematics Films about mathematicians Recreational mathematics Mathematics and art Mathematics education Number Large Mathematics portal Category Commons WikiProject Authority control databases International GND National United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Recreational_mathematics oldid=1368642564 " Categories : Mathematics Mathematics and culture Popular mathematics Recreational mathematics Mathematics literature Human activities Culture Popular scholarship Mathematics popularizers Everyday life Recreation Puzzles Games Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links CS1: long volume value Search Search Recreational mathematics 30 languages Add topic