Subjective well-being - Wikipedia Jump to content From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Self-reported measure of well-being UK personal wellbeing survey from 2012 to 2013, showing how many people scored themselves a 7 or higher on various factors Part of a series on Psychology Outline History Subfields Basic psychology Abnormal Affective neuroscience Affective science Behavioral genetics Behavioral neuroscience Behaviorism Cognitive / Cognitivism Cognitive neuroscience Social Comparative Cross-cultural Cultural Developmental Differential Ecological Evolutionary Experimental Gestalt Intelligence Mathematical Moral Neuropsychology Perception Personality Psycholinguistics Psychophysiology Quantitative Social Theoretical Applied psychology Anomalistic Applied behavior analysis Art Assessment Aviation Biography of famous people Clinical Coaching Color Community Consumer Counseling Critical Crowd Educational Ergonomics Fashion Feminist Food Forensic police Health History Humanistic Industrial and organizational Legal Media Medical Military Music Occupational health Pastoral Peace and war Political Positive Photography Psychometrics Psychotherapy Religion School Sex differences Space Sport and exercise Suicidology Systems Trading Traffic Concepts Behavior Behavioral engineering Behavioral genetics Behavioral neuroscience Cognition Competence Consciousness Consumer behavior Emotions Feelings Human factors and ergonomics Intelligence Maslow's hierarchy of needs Mental state Mind Psychology of religion Psychometrics Sex differences Terror management theory Lists Counseling topics Disciplines Organizations Outline Psychologists Psychotherapies Research methods Schools of thought Timeline Topics Psychology portal v t e Subjective well-being ( SWB ) is a concept of well-being (happiness) that focuses on evaluations from the perspective of the people whose lives are being evaluated rather than from an objective viewpoint. SWB measures often rely on self-reports, but that does not make them SWB measures. Objective measures of wellbeing are also sometimes measured with self-reports and SWB can also be measured with informant ratings. [ 1 ] Ed Diener defined SWB in terms of three indicators of subjective well-being: frequent positive affect , infrequent negative affect , and cognitive evaluations such as life satisfaction . [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] SWB includes two different subjective measures of well-being that are based on different definitions of happiness. Experiences of positive affect (mood, emotions), and experiences of negative affect (mood, emotions) can be used to create a measure of the amount of positive and negative affect in people's lives. These hedonic balance scores measure subjective wellbeing from a hedonistic perspective that define happiness as high PA and low NA. Life-satisfaction is based on a subjective view of happiness. Accordingly, there is no objective way to define happiness and people have to define it for themselves. They then use their own definition of happiness to evaluate their actual. [ 5 ] Therefore SWB is not a definition of happiness . Rather it is a label for two definitions of happiness, a hedonistic one and a subjective one. Both are based on subjective experiences, but the subjective experiences are different. Hedonism relies on aggregation of momentary affective experiences. Life-satisfaction relies on the recall and evaluation of past experiences. Although SWB tends to be stable over the time [ 5 ] and is strongly related to personality traits , [ 6 ] the emotional component of SWB can be impacted by situations; for example, the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic , lowered emotional well-being by 74%. [ 7 ] There is evidence that health and SWB may mutually influence each other, as good health tends to be associated with greater happiness, [ 8 ] and a number of studies have found that positive emotions and optimism can have a beneficial influence on health. [ 9 ] Construction of SWB [ edit ] Diener argued that the various components of SWB represent distinct constructs that need to be understood separately, even though they are closely related. Hence, SWB may be considered "a general area of scientific interest rather than a single specific construct". [ 5 ] Due to the specific focus on the subjective aspects of well-being, definitions of SWB typically exclude objective conditions such as material conditions or health , although these can influence ratings of SWB. [ 1 ] Definitions of SWB therefore focus on how a person evaluates his/her own life, including emotional experiences of pleasure versus pain in response to specific events and cognitive evaluations of what a person considers a good life . [ 10 ] Components of SWB relating to affect include positive affect (experiencing pleasant emotions and moods) and low negative affect (experiencing unpleasant, distressing emotions and moods), as well as "overall affect" or " hedonic balance", defined as the overall equilibrium between positive and negative affect, and usually measured as the difference between the two. [ 6 ] High positive affect and low negative affect are often highly correlated, but not always. [ 10 ] Components of SWB [ edit ] There are three components of SWB: affect (hedonic measures), life satisfaction (cognitive measures), and eudaimonia (a sense of meaning and purpose). Current research recognizes the importance of accurately assessing SWB within a society by focusing on how each component of SWB impacts the individual. [ 11 ] Affect [ edit ] Affect refers to the emotions, moods, and feelings a person has. These can be all positive, all negative, or a combination of both positive and negative. [ 12 ] Some research shows also that feelings of reward are separate from positive and negative affect. [ 13 ] Research also recognizes that when evaluating subjective well-being, approaches to affect can be interchangeable between children and adults. [ 14 ] Life satisfaction [ edit ] Life satisfaction (global judgments of one's life [ 15 ] ) and satisfaction with specific life domains (e.g. work satisfaction) are considered cognitive components of SWB. [ 10 ] The term " happiness " is sometimes used in regards to SWB and has been defined variously as "satisfaction of desires and goals" (therefore related to life satisfaction), as a "preponderance of positive over negative affect" (therefore related to emotional components of SWB), [ 1 ] as "contentment", [ 16 ] and as a "consistent, optimistic mood state" [ 6 ] and may imply an affective evaluation of one's life as a whole. [ 17 ] Life satisfaction can also be known as the "stable" component in one's life. [ 1 ] Affective concepts of SWB can be considered in terms of momentary emotional states as well as in terms of longer-term moods and tendencies (i.e. how much positive and/or negative affect a person generally experiences over any given period of time). [ 5 ] Life satisfaction and in some research happiness are typically considered over long durations, up to one's lifetime. [ 6 ] " Quality of life " has also been studied as a conceptualization of SWB. Although its exact definition varies, it is usually measured as an aggregation of well-being across several life domains and may include both subjective and objective components. [ 6 ] Eudaimonia [ edit ] Eudaimonic measures seek to quantify traits like virtue and wisdom as well as concepts related to fulfilling our potential such as meaning , purpose , and flourishing . Eudaimonic measures are often regarded as a core component of SWB, particularly in the field of positive psychology . However, it is unclear whether measures of meaning are really measures of wellbeing and little data has been collected on them. [ 18 ] It is difficult to prove that eudaimonic measures of SWB are reliable, and more research is needed to increase the reliability of research methods which utilize this component of subjective well-being. [ 11 ] As interdisciplinary research becomes more commonplace, a stronger understanding of previously overlooked eudaimonic experiences may arise from more reliable research methods. [ 19 ] The importance of assessing an individual's eudaimonia in understanding their subjective well-being can be seen as early as in research with elementary school students. [ 14 ] Measurement [ edit ] Life satisfaction and Affect balance are generally measured separately and independently. [ 20 ] Life satisfaction is generally measured using a self-report method. A common measurement for life satisfaction is questionnaires. In SWB research, evaluating life satisfaction is the most common practice. [ 11 ] Affective balance is also generally measured using a self-report method. An example of a measurement of affective balance is the PANAS (Positive Affect Negative Affect Schedule). [ 20 ] Sometimes a single SWB question attempts to capture an overall picture. [ 21 ] For example, the World Happiness Report uses a Cantril ladder survey, in which respondents are asked to think of a ladder, with the best possible life for them being a 10, and the worst possible life being a 0, and are then asked to rate their own current lives on that 0 to 10 scale. [ 22 ] The issue with such measurements of life satisfaction and affective balance is that they are self-reports. The problem with self-reports is that the participants may be lying or at least not telling the whole truth on the questionnaires. Participants may be lying or holding back from revealing certain things because they are either embarrassed or they may be filling in what they believe the researcher wants to see in the results. To gain more accurate results, other methods of measurement have been used to determine one's SWB. Another way to corroborate or confirm that the self-report results are accurate is through informant reports. [ 20 ] Informant reports are given to the participant's closest friends and family and they are asked to fill out either a survey or a form asking about the participants mood, emotions, and overall lifestyle. The participant may write in the self-report that they are very happy, however that participant's friends and family record that he/she is always depressed. This would obviously be a contradiction in results which would ultimately lead to inaccurate results. Informant reports are found to be ineffective to determine the subjective well-being of children. [ 14 ] Another method of gaining a better understanding of the true results is through ESM, or the Experience Sampling Method. [ 20 ] In this measure, participants are given a beeper/pager that will randomly ring throughout the day. Whenever the beeper/pager sounds, the participant will stop what he/she is doing and record the activity they are currently engaged in and their current mood and feelings. Tracking this over a period of a week or a month will give researchers a better understanding of the true emotions, moods, and feelings the participant is experiencing, and how these factors interact with other thoughts and behaviors. [ 23 ] Measuring an individual's mood over time may also be a reliable indicator of how their SWB is influenced on a day-to-day basis. [ 24 ] A third measurement to ensure validity is the Day Reconstruction Method. [ 20 ] In this measure, participants fill out a diary of the previous days' activities. The participant is then asked to describe each activity and provide a report of how they were feeling, what mood they were experiencing, and any emotions that surfaced. Thus to ensure valid results, a researcher may tend to use self-reports along with another form of measurement mentioned above. Someone with a high level of life satisfaction and a positive affective balance is said to have a high level of SWB. [ 20 ] The research into the SWB of blue-collar immigrant employees offers an alternative to the self-report method by instead measuring resource loss and gain. [ 25 ] In research showing how cognitive, affective, or eudemonic components of SWB relate to consumption, it becomes clear that eudemonia needs to be measured differently than affect or cognition when evaluating an individual's subjective happiness. This research also highlights that an individual's affect can be used to measure SWB in the short-term, while SWB in the long-term can be measured through the Cantril ladder, life satisfaction, or eudemonia. Research into the relationship between the components of SWB and consumption highlights the positive impact relational and experiential consumption have on an individual's SWB, while clarifying how materialistic consumption prevents an individual from experiencing those positive effects. [ 26 ] Research limitations that arise when measuring a person's affect include a narrow focus only on the short term, while limitations from measuring life satisfaction can be overly broad in the scope of the results. [ 27 ] Theories [ edit ] Theories of the causes of SWB tend to emphasize either top-down or bottom-up influences. [ 1 ] Top-down perspective [ edit ] In the top-down view, global features of personality influence the way a person perceives events. Individuals may therefore have a global tendency to perceive life in a consistently positive or negative manner, depending on their stable personality traits. [ 28 ] Top-down theories of SWB suggest that people have a genetic predisposition to be happy or unhappy and this predisposition determines their SWB "setpoint". Set Point theory implies that a person's baseline or equilibrium level of SWB is a consequence of hereditary characteristics and therefore, almost entirely predetermined at birth. [ 29 ] Evidence for this genetic predisposition derives from behavior-genetic studies that have found that positive and negative affectivity each have high heritability (40% and 55% respectively in one study). [ 5 ] Numerous twin studies confirm the notion of set point theory, however, they do not rule out the possibility that is it possible for individuals to experience long term changes in SWB. [ 29 ] [ 30 ] Diener et al. note that heritability studies are limited in that they describe long-term SWB in a sample of people in a modern western society but may not be applicable to more extreme environments that might influence SWB and do not provide absolute indicators of genetic effects. Additionally, heritability estimates are inconsistent across studies. Further evidence for a genetically influenced predisposition to SWB comes from findings that personality has a large influence on long-term SWB. This has led to the dynamic equilibrium model of SWB. This model proposes that personality provides a baseline for emotional responses. External events may move people away from the baseline, sometimes dramatically, but these movements tend to be of limited duration, with most people returning to their baseline eventually. [ 5 ] Of the conclusions that can be drawn from assessing the development of subjective well-being across one's life span includes the extent to which the set point of SWB can be considered hereditary, which supports the top-down perspective. [ 27 ] Bottom-up perspective [ edit ] From a bottom-up perspective, happiness is created from happy experiences. [ 31 ] Bottom-up influences include external events, and broad situational and demographic factors, including health and marital status. Bottom-up approaches are based on the idea that there are universal basic human needs and that happiness results from their fulfilment. In support of this view, there is evidence that daily pleasurable events are associated with increased positive affect, and daily unpleasant events or hassles are associated with increased negative affect. However, research suggests that external events account for a much smaller proportion of the variance in self-reports of SWB than top-down factors, such as personality. [ 5 ] A theory proposed to explain the limited impact of external events on SWB is hedonic adaptation. [ 10 ] Based originally on the concept of a " hedonic treadmill ", this theory proposes that positive or negative external events temporarily increase or decrease feelings of SWB, but as time passes people tend to become habituated to their circumstances and have a tendency to return to a personal SWB "setpoint" or baseline level. The hedonic treadmill theory originally proposed that most people return to a neutral level of SWB (i.e. neither happy nor unhappy) as they habituate to events. However, subsequent research has shown that for most people, the baseline level of SWB is at least mildly positive, as most people tend to report being at least somewhat happy in general and tend to experience positive mood when no adverse events are occurring. Additional refinements to this theory have shown that people do not adapt to all life events equally, as people tend to adapt rapidly to some events (e.g. imprisonment), slowly to others (e.g. the death of a loved one), and not at all to others (e.g. noise and sex). [ 10 ] The research behind the development of SWB across one's life span concludes that despite the impact certain experiences may have on an individual's subjective well-being their subjective well-being will eventually return to its set point over time, which supports the bottom-up perspective. [ 27 ] Research describes homeostatically protected mood as the numeric set point where an individual's SWB will consistently return, supporting the ideas presented by the bottom-up perspective. [ 32 ] Factors [ edit ] Personality and genetics [ edit ] A number of studies have found that SWB constructs are strongly associated with a range of personality traits, including those in the five factor model . [ 6 ] [ 17 ] [ 33 ] Findings from numerous personality studies show that genetics account for 20–48% of the variance in the Five-Factor Model and the variance in subjective well-being is also heritable. [ 34 ] Specifically, neuroticism predicts poorer subjective well-being whilst extraversion , agreeableness , conscientiousness and openness to experience tend to predict higher subjective well-being. A Meta-analyses found that neuroticism, extraversion, agreeableness, and conscientiousness were significantly related to all facets of SWB examined (positive, negative, and overall affect; happiness; life satisfaction; and quality of life). Meta-analytic research shows that neuroticism is the strongest predictor of overall SWB and is the strongest predictor of negative affect. [ 6 ] A large number of personality traits are related to SWB constructs, although intelligence has negligible relationships. [ 17 ] Positive affect is most strongly predicted by extraversion, to a lesser extent agreeableness, and more weakly by openness to experience. Happiness was most strongly predicted by extraversion, and also strongly predicted by neuroticism, and to a lesser extent by the other three factors. Life satisfaction was significantly predicted by neuroticism, extraversion, agreeableness, and conscientiousness. Quality of life was very strongly predicted by neuroticism, and also strongly predicted by extraversion and conscientiousness, and to a modest extent by agreeableness and openness to experience. [ 6 ] One study found that subjective well-being was genetically indistinct from personality traits, especially those that reflected emotional stability (low Neuroticism), and social and physical activity (high Extraversion), and constraint (high Conscientiousness). [ 35 ] DeNeve (1999) argued that there are three trends in the relationship between personality and SWB. Firstly, SWB is closely tied to traits associated with emotional tendencies ( emotional stability , positive affectivity, and tension). Secondly, relationship enhancing traits (e.g. trust , affiliation) are important for subjective well-being. Happy people tend to have strong relationships and be good at fostering them. Thirdly, the way people think about and explain events is important for subject