Artificial consciousness - Wikipedia Jump to content From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Hypothetical consciousness in artificial systems Part of a series on Artificial intelligence (AI) Major goals Artificial general intelligence superintelligence Intelligent agent Recursive self-improvement Planning Computer vision General game playing Knowledge representation Natural language processing Robotics AI safety Approaches Machine learning Data mining Symbolic Deep learning Bayesian networks Evolutionary algorithms Neuro-symbolic AI Systems integration Open-source Open weights AI data centers Applications Art Music Bioinformatics Deepfake Earth sciences Finance Generative AI Audio Images Government Healthcare Industry Software development Translation Military Physics Projects Philosophy AI alignment Artificial consciousness The bitter lesson Chinese room Friendly AI Ethics Existential risk Turing test Uncanny valley Human–AI interaction History Timeline Progress AI winter AI boom AI build-out financing AI bubble Controversies Deepfake pornography Taylor Swift deepfake pornography controversy Grok sexual deepfake scandal Google Gemini image generation controversy It's the Most Terrible Time of the Year Navier–Stokes priority controversy Pause Giant AI Experiments Project Panama Removal of Sam Altman from OpenAI Statement on AI Risk Tay (chatbot) Théâtre D'opéra Spatial Voiceverse NFT plagiarism scandal AI-generated violent extremist content Glossary v t e Artificial consciousness , [ 1 ] also known as machine consciousness , [ 2 ] [ 3 ] synthetic consciousness , [ 4 ] or digital consciousness , [ 5 ] is consciousness hypothesized to be possible for artificial intelligence . [ 6 ] It is also the corresponding field of study, which draws insights from philosophy of mind , philosophy of artificial intelligence , cognitive science and neuroscience . The term " sentience " can be used when specifically designating ethical considerations stemming from a form of phenomenal consciousness (P-consciousness, or the ability to feel qualia ). [ 7 ] Since sentience involves the ability to experience ethically positive or negative (i.e., valenced ) mental states , it may justify welfare concerns and legal protection, as with non-human animals. [ 8 ] Some scholars believe that consciousness is generated by the interoperation of various parts of the brain ; these mechanisms are labeled the neural correlates of consciousness (NCC). Some further believe that constructing a system (e.g., a computer system) that can emulate this NCC interoperation would result in a system that is conscious. [ 9 ] Some scholars reject the possibility of non-biological conscious beings. [ 10 ] [ 11 ] Philosophical views [ edit ] As there are many hypothesized types of consciousness , there are many potential implementations of artificial consciousness. In the philosophical literature, perhaps the most common taxonomy of consciousness is into "access" and "phenomenal" variants. Access consciousness concerns those aspects of experience that can be apprehended, while phenomenal consciousness concerns those aspects of experience that seemingly cannot be apprehended, instead being characterized qualitatively in terms of "raw feels", "what it is like" or qualia. [ 12 ] Plausibility debate [ edit ] Type-identity theorists and other skeptics hold the view that consciousness can be realized only in particular physical systems because consciousness has properties that necessarily depend on physical constitution. [ 13 ] [ 14 ] [ 15 ] [ 16 ] In his 2001 article "Artificial Consciousness: Utopia or Real Possibility," Giorgio Buttazzo says that a common objection to artificial consciousness is that, "Working in a fully automated mode, they [the computers] cannot exhibit creativity, unreprogrammation (which means can 'no longer be reprogrammed', from rethinking), emotions, or free will . A computer, like a washing machine, is a slave operated by its components." [ 17 ] For other theorists (e.g., functionalists ), who define mental states in terms of causal roles, any system that can instantiate the same pattern of causal roles, regardless of physical constitution, will instantiate the same mental states, including consciousness. [ 18 ] Thought experiments [ edit ] The "fading qualia" (left) and the "dancing qualia" (right) are two thought experiments about consciousness and brain replacement. Chalmers argues that both are contradicted by the lack of reaction of the subject to changing perception, and are thus impossible in practice. He concludes that the equivalent silicon brain will have the same perceptions as the biological brain. [ 19 ] [ 20 ] David Chalmers proposed two thought experiments intending to demonstrate that "functionally isomorphic " systems (those with the same "fine-grained functional organization", i.e., the same information processing) will have qualitatively identical conscious experiences, regardless of whether they are based on biological neurons or digital hardware. [ 20 ] [ 21 ] The "fading qualia " is a reductio ad absurdum thought experiment. It involves replacing, one by one, the neurons of a brain with a functionally identical component, for example based on a silicon chip . Chalmers makes the hypothesis , knowing it in advance to be absurd, that "the qualia fade or disappear" when neurons are replaced one-by-one with identical silicon equivalents. Since the original neurons and their silicon counterparts are functionally identical, the brain's information processing should remain unchanged, and the subject's behaviour and introspective reports would stay exactly the same. Chalmers argues that this leads to an absurd conclusion: the subject would continue to report normal conscious experiences even as their actual qualia fade away. He concludes that the subject's qualia actually don't fade, and that the resulting robotic brain, once every neuron is replaced, would remain just as sentient as the original biological brain. [ 20 ] [ 19 ] Similarly, the "dancing qualia" thought experiment is another reductio ad absurdum argument. It supposes that two functionally isomorphic systems could have different perceptions (for instance, seeing the same object in different colors, like red and blue). It involves a switch that alternates between a chunk of brain that causes the perception of red, and a functionally isomorphic silicon chip, that causes the perception of blue. Since both perform the same function within the brain, the subject would not notice any change during the switch. Chalmers argues that this would be highly implausible if the qualia were truly switching between red and blue, hence the contradiction. Therefore, he concludes that the equivalent digital system would not only experience qualia, but it would perceive the same qualia as the biological system (e.g., seeing the same color). [ 20 ] [ 19 ] Greg Egan 's short story Learning To Be Me (mentioned in §In fiction ), illustrates how undetectable duplication of the brain and its functionality could be from a first-person perspective. Critics object that Chalmers' proposal begs the question in assuming that all mental properties and external connections are already sufficiently captured by abstract causal organization. Van Heuveln et al. argue that the dancing qualia argument contains an equivocation fallacy, conflating a "change in experience" between two systems with an "experience of change" within a single system. [ 22 ] Mogensen argues that the fading qualia argument can be resisted by appealing to vagueness at the boundaries of consciousness and the holistic structure of conscious neural activity, which suggests consciousness may require specific biological substrates rather than being substrate-independent. [ 23 ] Anil Seth argues that the complexity of brain neurons intrinsically matters in addition to their function and that it is not possible to replace any part of the brain with a perfect silicon equivalent. He points out that some of biological neurons exhibit activity aimed at cleaning up metabolic waste products, and writes that a perfect silicon replacement would require a silicon-based metabolism, but silicon is not suitable for creating such artificial metabolism. [ 11 ] In large language models [ edit ] In 2022, Google engineer Blake Lemoine made a viral claim that Google's LaMDA chatbot was sentient. Lemoine supplied as evidence the chatbot's humanlike answers to many of his questions; however, the chatbot's behavior was judged by the scientific community as likely a consequence of mimicry, rather than machine sentience. Lemoine's claim was widely derided for being ridiculous. [ 24 ] Moreover, attributing consciousness based solely on the basis of LLM outputs or the immersive experience created by an algorithm is considered a fallacy. [ 25 ] However, while philosopher Nick Bostrom states that LaMDA is unlikely to be conscious, he additionally poses the question of "what grounds would a person have for being sure about it?" One would have to have access to unpublished information about LaMDA's architecture, and also would have to understand how consciousness works, and then figure out how to map the philosophy onto the machine: "(In the absence of these steps), it seems like one should be maybe a little bit uncertain. [...] there could well be other systems now, or in the relatively near future, that would start to satisfy the criteria." [ 26 ] David Chalmers argued in 2023 that LLMs today display impressive conversational and general intelligence abilities, but are likely not conscious yet, as they lack some features that may be necessary, such as recurrent processing, a global workspace , and unified agency. Nonetheless, he considers that non-biological systems can be conscious, and suggested that future, extended models (LLM+s) incorporating these elements might eventually meet the criteria for consciousness, raising both profound scientific questions and significant ethical challenges. [ 27 ] However, the view that consciousness can exist without biological phenomena is controversial and some reject it. [ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 25 ] Kristina Šekrst cautions that anthropomorphic terms such as " hallucination " can obscure important ontological differences between artificial and human cognition. [ 28 ] While LLMs may produce human-like outputs, she argues that it does not justify ascribing mental states or consciousness to them. Instead, she advocates for an epistemological framework (such as reliabilism ) that recognizes the distinct nature of AI knowledge production. [ 29 ] She suggests that apparent understanding in LLMs may be a sophisticated form of AI hallucination. She also questions what would happen if an LLM were trained without any mention of consciousness. [ 30 ] A 2025 study reported that when LLMs' ability to roleplay or lie is suppressed, they are more likely to say they are self-aware or conscious. [ 31 ] [ 32 ] Testing [ edit ] Sentience is an inherently first-person phenomenon. Because of that, and due to the lack of an empirical definition of sentience, directly measuring it may be impossible. Although systems may display numerous behaviors correlated with sentience, determining whether a system is sentient is known as the hard problem of consciousness . In the case of AI, there is the additional difficulty that the AI may be trained to act like a human, or incentivized to appear sentient, which makes behavioral markers of sentience less reliable. [ 33 ] [ 34 ] Additionally, some chatbots have been trained to say they are not conscious. [ 35 ] A well-known method for testing machine intelligence is the Turing test , which assesses the ability to have a human-like conversation. But passing the Turing test does not indicate that an AI system is sentient, as the AI may simply mimic human behavior without having the associated feelings. [ 36 ] In 2014, Victor Argonov suggested a non-Turing test for machine sentience based on machine's ability to produce philosophical judgments. [ 37 ] He argues that a deterministic machine must be regarded as conscious if it is able to produce judgments on all problematic properties of consciousness (such as qualia or binding ) having no innate (preloaded) philosophical knowledge on these issues, no philosophical discussions while learning, and no informational models of other creatures in its memory (such models may implicitly or explicitly contain knowledge about these creatures' consciousness). However, this test can be used only to detect, but not refute the existence of consciousness. Just as with the Turing Test: a positive result proves that machine is conscious but a negative result proves nothing. For example, absence of philosophical judgments may be caused by lack of the machine's intellect, not by absence of consciousness. Ethics [ edit ] Main articles: Ethics of artificial intelligence , Machine ethics , and Roboethics If it were suspected that a particular machine was conscious, its rights would be an ethical issue that would need to be assessed (e.g. what rights it would have under law). [ 38 ] For example, a conscious computer that was owned and used as a tool or central computer within a larger machine is a particular ambiguity. Should laws be made for such a case? Consciousness would also require a legal definition in this particular case. Because artificial consciousness is still largely a theoretical subject, such ethics have not been discussed or developed to a great extent, though it has often been a theme in fiction. AI sentience would give rise to concerns of welfare and legal protection, [ 8 ] whereas other aspects of consciousness related to cognitive capabilities may be more relevant for AI rights. [ 39 ] Sentience is generally considered sufficient for moral consideration, but some philosophers consider that moral consideration could also stem from other notions of consciousness, or from capabilities unrelated to consciousness, [ 40 ] [ 41 ] such as: "having a sophisticated conception of oneself as persisting through time; having agency and the ability to pursue long-term plans; being able to communicate and respond to normative reasons; having preferences and powers; standing in certain social relationships with other beings that have moral status; being able to make commitments and to enter into reciprocal arrangements; or having the potential to develop some of these attributes." [ 40 ] Ethical concerns still apply (although to a lesser extent) when the consciousness is uncertain , as long as the probability is deemed non-negligible. The precautionary principle is also relevant if the moral cost of mistakenly attributing or denying moral consideration to AI differs significantly. [ 41 ] [ 8 ] In 2021, German philosopher Thomas Metzinger argued for a global moratorium on synthetic phenomenology until 2050. Metzinger asserts that humans have a duty of care towards any sentient AIs they create, and that proceeding too fast risks creating an "explosion of artificial suffering". [ 42 ] David Chalmers also argued that creating conscious AI would "raise a new group of difficult ethical challenges, with the potential for new forms of injustice". [ 27 ] Aspects of consciousness [ edit ] See also: Consciousness § Academic definitions of consciousness Bernard Baars and others argue there are various aspects of consciousness necessary for a machine to be artificially conscious. [ 43 ] The functions of consciousness suggested by Baars are: definition and context setting, adaptation and learning, editing, flagging and debugging, recruiting and control, prioritizing and access-control, decision-making or executive function, analogy-forming function, metacognitive and self-monitoring function, and autoprogramming and self-maintenance function. Igor Aleksander suggested 12 principles for artificial consciousness: [ 44 ] the brain is a state machine, inner neuron partitioning, conscious and unconscious states, perceptual learning and memory, prediction, the awareness of self, representation of meaning, learning utterances, learning language, will, instinct, and emotion. The aim of AC is to define whether and how these and other aspects of consciousness can be synthesized in an engineered artifact such as a digital computer. This list is not exhaustive; there are many others not covered. Subjective experience [ edit ] Some philosophers, such as David Chalmers , use the term consciousness to refer exclusively to phenomenal consciousness, which is roughly equivalent to sentience. [ 45 ] Others use the word sentience to refer exclusively to valenced (ethically positive or negative) subjective experiences, like pleasure or suffering. [ 27 ] Explaining why and how subjective experience arises is known as the hard problem of consciousness . [ 46 ] Awareness [ edit ] Awareness could be one required aspect, but there are many problems with the exact definition of awareness . The results of the experiments of neuroscanning on monkeys suggest that a process, not only a state or object, activates neurons. Awareness includes creating and testing alternative models of each process based on the information received through the senses or imagined, [ clarification needed ] and is also useful for making predictions. Such modeling needs a lot of flexibility. Creating such a model includes modeling the physical world, modeling one's own internal states and processes, and modeling other conscious entities. There are at least three types of awareness: [ 47 ] agency awareness, goal awareness, and sensorimotor awareness, which may also be conscious or not. For example, in agency awareness, you may be aware that you performed a certain action yesterday, but are not now conscious of it. In goal awareness, you may be aware that you must search for a lost object, but are not now conscious of it. In sensorimotor awareness, you may be aware that your hand is resting on an object, but are not now conscious of it. Because objects of awareness are often conscious, the distinction between awareness and consciousness is frequently blurred or they are used as synonyms. [ 48 ] Memory [ edit ] Conscious events interact with memory systems in learning, rehearsal, and retrieval. [ 49 ] The IDA model [ 50 ] elucidates the role of consciousness in the updating of perceptual memory, [ 51 ] transient episodic memory , and procedural memory . Transient episodic and declarative memories have distributed representations in IDA; there is evidence that this is also the case in the nervous system. [ 52 ] In IDA, these two memories are implemented computationally using a modified version of Kanerva 's sparse distributed memory architecture. [ 53 ] Learning [ edit ] Learning is also considered necessary for artificial consciousness. Per Bernard Baars, conscious experience is needed to represent and adapt to novel and significant events. [ 43 ] Per Axel Cleeremans and Luis Jiménez, learning is defined as "a set of philogenetically [ sic ] advanced adaptation processes that critically depend on an evolved sensitivity to subjective experience so as to enable agents to afford flexible control over their actions in complex, unpredictable environments". [ 54 ] Anticipation [ edit ] The ability to predict (or anticipate ) foreseeable events is considered important for artificial intelligence by Igor Aleksander . [ 55 ] The emergentist multiple drafts principle [ 56 ] proposed by Daniel Dennett in Consciousness Explained may be useful for prediction: it involves the evaluation and selection of the most appropriate "draft" to fit the current environment. Anticipation includes prediction of consequences of one's own proposed actions and prediction of consequences of probable actions by other entities. [ 57 ] Relationships between real world states are mirrored in the state structure of a conscious organism, enabling the organism to predict events. [ 55 ] An artificially cons