Pacific Institute for the Mathematical Sciences - Wikipedia Jump to content From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Canadian-based research institute Pacific Institute for the Mathematical Sciences Established 1996 Focus Mathematics Director Özgür Yilmaz Location Vancouver , British Columbia Website pims.math.ca The Pacific Institute for the Mathematical Sciences (PIMS) is a mathematical institute created in 1996 by universities in Western Canada and the Northwestern United States to promote research and excellence in all areas of the mathematical sciences . It provides training and support for graduate students and post-doctoral researchers hosted at member institutions. It also supports visiting researchers and hosts events ranging from individual lectures to multi-year "collaborative research groups (CRGs)" [ 1 ] in the mathematical sciences. Additionally, PIMS has a large educational outreach program aimed at promoting mathematics at all levels but with particular focus on primary and secondary levels ( K–12 ). Structure [ edit ] PIMS has a distributed structure. Its central offices are located on the campus of the University of British Columbia . The members of the institute are: 10 full members: University of British Columbia , University of Calgary , University of Alberta , University of Regina , University of Victoria , University of Saskatchewan , Simon Fraser University , University of Washington , University of Lethbridge , and University of Manitoba . 4 affiliate members: University of Portland , University of Northern British Columbia , Athabasca University and First Nations University of Canada . PIMS receives funding from NSERC and provincial governments. In 2007, the institute became a Unité Mixte Internationale of the French CNRS . [ 2 ] [ 3 ] PIMS Directors: Nassif Ghoussoub (1995–2003), Ivar Ekeland (2003–2008), Alejandro Adem (2008–2015), Martin Barlow (2015–2016), James Colliander (2016–2021), Jayadev Athreya (2021–2022), Özgür Yılmaz (2022-2027). Research program [ edit ] Research at PIMS includes both hostings of events and support for personnel. Post-doctoral researchers, visitors and graduate students supported by PIMS are hosted at one of the sites for the duration of their stay. The event programs include individual lectures, seminar series and scientific meetings. An international scientific review panel [ 4 ] adjudicates event applications and decides on the scientific programs. Longer term projects are supported as Collaborative Research Groups [ 5 ] which will typically include a series of thematic activities such as summer schools and workshops, as well as postdoctoral fellow. PIMS also supports an International Graduate Training Centre (IGTC) that focuses on Mathematical Biology. Education and outreach [ edit ] PIMS is involved in all levels of mathematical education from Elementary School onwards. In British Columbia , PIMS organizes the Elementary Math Contest (Elmacon), [ 6 ] an annual competition open to grades 5, 6 and 7. Math Mania [ 7 ] is directed at high school students and uses interactive games and demonstrations to introduce students to mathematical concepts. PIMS also runs teacher workshops in many rural areas and conferences. For example, the annual 'Changing the Culture' [ 8 ] conference which brings together teachers and educators to discuss issues and new developments relating to mathematics education. Outreach to Aboriginal and First Nations students [ 9 ] is also a strong focus for the BC and Saskatchewan sites, with annual summer camps, programs and resources aimed at providing increased learning opportunities for those students, for example, the Aboriginal Perspectives website established in 2009. mathtube.org [ edit ] In October 2011, PIMS launched a new multimedia site, mathtube.org . This site includes lecture videos, slides and notes from significant PIMS lectures from the past decade, as well as recent events. The site was created to meet the increasing demand to see lecture content online. The site features notable speakers such as Edward Witten , Ram Murty , Dusa McDuff and George Papanicolaou , [ 10 ] and is updated regularly. See also [ edit ] Mathematics portal CRM–Fields–PIMS prize References [ edit ] ↑ PIMS focus periods pims.math.ca. Retrieved 2012-02-28 . ↑ "L'Unité Mixte Internationale 3069 au Canada : PIMS" . www.cnrs.fr (in French) . Retrieved 2018-02-20 . ↑ "Collaborations - Partnerships | Pacific Institute for the Mathematical Sciences - PIMS" . www.pims.math.ca . Retrieved 2018-02-20 . ↑ PIMS Scientific Review Panel . pims.math.ca. Retrieved 2012-02-28 . ↑ PIMS Collaborative Research Groups . pims.math.ca. Retrieved 2012-02-28 . ↑ Elementary Math Contest Website . elmacon.org. Retrieved 2012-02-28 . ↑ PIMS Math Mania . pims.math.ca. Retrieved 2012-03-05 . ↑ Changing the Culture . pims.math.ca. Retrieved 2012-03-05 . ↑ PIMS Aboriginal/First Nations outreach programs . pims.math.ca. Retrieved 2012-03-05 . ↑ George Papanicolaou's personal website . stanford.edu. Retrieved 2012-03-05 . . External links [ edit ] www.pims.math.ca mathtube.org www.elmacon.org NSERC CNRS Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National United States Pacific Institute for the Mathematical Sciences /span>"}]]}'> Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX v t e Mathematics in Canada Organizations Banff International Research Station Canadian Mathematical Society Centre de Recherches Mathématiques Fields Institute for Research in Mathematical Sciences Pacific Institute for the Mathematical Sciences Tutte Institute for Mathematics and Computing Centre for Education in Mathematics and Computing Mathematics departments McGill University University of Toronto St. George/Graduate Mississauga Scarborough University of Waterloo Journals Ars Combinatoria Canadian Journal of Mathematics Canadian Mathematical Bulletin Crux Mathematicorum Competitions Canadian Mathematical Olympiad Canadian Open Mathematics Challenge Canadian Mathematics Competition Awards Adrien Pouliot Award Coxeter–James Prize CRM-Fields-PIMS prize Jeffery–Williams Prize Krieger–Nelson Prize Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pacific_Institute_for_the_Mathematical_Sciences oldid=1377957880 " Categories : 1996 establishments in Canada 1996 establishments in the United States Canada–United States relations French National Centre for Scientific Research International research institutes for mathematics Mathematical institutes in Canada Organizations based in Vancouver Athabasca University Research institutes affiliated with Simon Fraser University First Nations University of Canada Research institutes affiliated with the University of Alberta Research institutes affiliated with the University of British Columbia Research institutes affiliated with the University of Calgary Research institutes in Manitoba University of Northern British Columbia Research institutes affiliated with the University of Saskatchewan Research institutes affiliated with the University of Regina Research institutes affiliated with the University of Victoria Research institutes in British Columbia Research institutes in Canada Research institutes in Alberta University of Lethbridge Research institutes in Saskatchewan Research institutes affiliated with the University of Manitoba Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata CS1 French-language sources (fr) Search Search Pacific Institute for the Mathematical Sciences 3 languages Add topic