Evolutionary psychology - Wikipedia Jump to content From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Branch of psychology For the academic journal, see Evolutionary Psychology (journal) . Not to be confused with Evolutionary psychiatry . Part of a series on Psychology Outline History Subfields Basic psychology Abnormal Affective neuroscience Affective science Behavioral genetics Behavioral neuroscience Behaviorism Cognitive / Cognitivism Cognitive neuroscience Social Comparative Cross-cultural Cultural Developmental Differential Ecological Evolutionary Experimental Gestalt Intelligence Mathematical Moral Neuropsychology Perception Personality Psycholinguistics Psychophysiology Quantitative Social Theoretical Applied psychology Anomalistic Applied behavior analysis Art Assessment Aviation Biography of famous people Clinical Coaching Color Community Consumer Counseling Critical Crowd Educational Ergonomics Fashion Feminist Food Forensic police Health History Humanistic Industrial and organizational Legal Media Medical Military Music Occupational health Pastoral Peace and war Political Positive Photography Psychometrics Psychotherapy Religion School Sex differences Space Sport and exercise Suicidology Systems Trading Traffic Concepts Behavior Behavioral engineering Behavioral genetics Behavioral neuroscience Cognition Competence Consciousness Consumer behavior Emotions Feelings Human factors and ergonomics Intelligence Maslow's hierarchy of needs Mental state Mind Psychology of religion Psychometrics Sex differences Terror management theory Lists Counseling topics Disciplines Organizations Outline Psychologists Psychotherapies Research methods Schools of thought Timeline Topics Psychology portal v t e Evolutionary psychology is a theoretical approach in psychology that examines cognition and behavior from a modern evolutionary perspective. [ 1 ] It seeks to identify human psychological adaptations with regard to the ancestral problems they evolved to solve. In this framework, psychological traits and mechanisms are either functional products of natural and sexual selection or non-adaptive by-products of other adaptive traits. [ 2 ] Adaptationist thinking about physiological mechanisms, such as the heart , lungs , and the liver , is common in evolutionary biology . Evolutionary psychologists apply the same line of thinking in psychology, arguing that just as the heart evolved to pump blood, the liver evolved to detoxify poisons, and the kidneys evolved to filter turbid fluids, there is modularity of mind , in that different psychological mechanisms evolved to solve distinct adaptive problems. [ 3 ] The evolutionary psychologists argue that much of human behavior is the output of psychological adaptations that evolved to solve recurrent problems in human ancestral environments. [ 4 ] Some evolutionary psychologists argue that evolutionary theory can provide a foundational, metatheoretical framework that integrates the entire field of psychology, much as evolutionary biology has done for biology. [ 5 ] Evolutionary psychologists hold that behaviors or traits that occur universally in all cultures are good candidates for evolutionary adaptations, [ 6 ] including the abilities to infer others' emotions, discern kin from non-kin, identify and prefer healthier mates, and cooperate with others. Findings have been made regarding human social behaviour related to infanticide , intelligence , marriage patterns, promiscuity , perception of beauty , bride price , and parental investment . The theories and findings of evolutionary psychology have applications in many fields, including economics (see sexual economics ), environment, health, law, management, psychiatry , politics , [ 7 ] and literature . [ 8 ] Criticism of evolutionary psychology involves questions of testability , cognitive and evolutionary assumptions (such as modular functioning of the brain, and large uncertainty about the ancestral environment), importance of non-genetic and non-adaptive explanations, and political and ethical implications of interpretations of research results. Scope [ edit ] Principles [ edit ] The central assumption of evolutionary psychology is that the human brain is composed of many specialized mechanisms that were shaped by natural selection over a vast period of time to solve the recurrent information-processing problems faced by our ancestors. These problems involve food choices, social hierarchies, the distribution of resources to offspring, and selecting mates. [ 9 ] Proponents suggest that it seeks to integrate psychology into the other natural sciences, rooting it in the organizing theory of biology ( evolutionary theory ), and thus understanding psychology as a branch of biology . Anthropologist John Tooby and psychologist Leda Cosmides wrote: Evolutionary psychology is the long-forestalled scientific attempt to assemble out of the disjointed, fragmentary, and mutually contradictory human disciplines a single, logically integrated research framework for the psychological, social, and behavioral sciences – a framework that not only incorporates the evolutionary sciences on a full and equal basis, but that systematically works out all of the revisions in existing belief and research practice that such a synthesis requires. [ 10 ] Just as human physiology and evolutionary physiology have worked to identify physical adaptations of the body that represent "human physiological nature," the purpose of evolutionary psychology is to identify evolved emotional and cognitive adaptations that represent "human psychological nature." According to Steven Pinker , it is "not a single theory but a large set of hypotheses" and a term that "has also come to refer to a particular way of applying evolutionary theory to the mind, with an emphasis on adaptation, gene-level selection, and modularity." Evolutionary psychology adopts an understanding of the mind grounded in the computational theory of mind . It describes mental processes as computational operations, so that, for example, a fear response is described as arising from a neurological computation that takes perceptual data, e.g., a visual image of a spider, and outputs the appropriate reaction, e.g., fear of possibly dangerous animals. Under this view, any domain-general learning is impossible because of the combinatorial explosion . Evolutionary psychology specifies the domain as the problems of survival and reproduction. [ 11 ] While philosophers have generally considered the human mind to include broad faculties, such as reason and lust, evolutionary psychologists describe evolved psychological mechanisms as narrowly focused on specific issues, such as catching cheaters or choosing mates. The discipline sees the human brain as having evolved specialized functions, called cognitive modules , or psychological adaptations which are shaped by natural selection. [ 12 ] Examples include language-acquisition modules , incest-avoidance mechanisms , cheater-detection mechanisms , intelligence and sex-specific mating preferences, foraging mechanisms, alliance-tracking mechanisms, agent-detection mechanisms, and others. Some mechanisms, termed domain-specific , deal with recurrent adaptive problems over the course of human evolutionary history. Domain-general mechanisms, on the other hand, are proposed to deal with evolutionary novelty. [ 13 ] Evolutionary psychology has roots in cognitive psychology and evolutionary biology but also draws on behavioral ecology , artificial intelligence , genetics , ethology , anthropology , archaeology , biology, ecopsychology and zoology . It is closely linked to sociobiology , [ 14 ] but there are key differences between them including the emphasis on domain-specific rather than domain-general mechanisms, the relevance of measures of current fitness , the importance of mismatch theory , and psychology rather than behavior. Nikolaas Tinbergen 's four categories of questions can help clarify the distinctions among several complementary types of explanations. [ 15 ] Evolutionary psychology focuses primarily on the "why?" questions, while traditional psychology focuses on the "how?" questions. [ 16 ] Table of categories Diachronic versus synchronic perspective Dynamic view Explanation of current form in terms of a historical sequence Static view Explanation of the current form of species How vs. why questions Proximate view How an individual organism's structures function Ontogeny (development) Developmental explanations for changes in individuals , from DNA to their current form Mechanism (causation) Mechanistic explanations for how an organism's structures work Ultimate (evolutionary) view Why a species evolved the structures (adaptations) it has Phylogeny (evolution) The history of the evolution of sequential changes in a species over many generations Function (adaptation) A species trait that solves a reproductive or survival problem in the current environment Premises [ edit ] Evolutionary psychology is founded on several core premises. [ 17 ] The brain is an information-processing device, and it produces behavior in response to external and internal inputs. The brain's adaptive mechanisms were shaped by natural and sexual selection. Different neural mechanisms are specialized for solving problems in humanity's evolutionary past. The brain has evolved specialized neural mechanisms that were designed for solving problems that recurred over deep evolutionary time, giving modern humans stone-age minds. Most contents and processes of the brain are unconscious, and most mental problems that seem easy to solve are actually extremely difficult problems that are solved unconsciously by complicated neural mechanisms. Human psychology comprises many specialized mechanisms, each sensitive to different classes of information or inputs. These mechanisms combine to produce manifest behavior. History [ edit ] Nobel Laureates Nikolaas Tinbergen (left) and Konrad Lorenz (right) who were, with Karl von Frisch , acknowledged for work on animal behavior [ 18 ] Main article: History of evolutionary psychology Evolutionary psychology has its historical roots in Charles Darwin 's theory of natural selection. In his book On the Origin of Species , Darwin predicted that psychology would develop an evolutionary basis: In the distant future I see open fields for far more important research. Psychology will be based on a new foundation, that of the necessary acquirement of each mental power and capacity by gradation. — Charles Darwin [ 19 ] Upon completing On the Origin of Species in 1859, Darwin shifted his focus to creating an evolution-based psychology, having viewed the development of an evolutionary explanation for higher human faculties as his most crucial undertaking since conceiving his theory of evolution in the late 1830s. He devoted more than a decade to study of the evolutionary origins of key aspects of human behaviour, in particular: the human intellect; rationality; human sexual behaviour; emotional expressions; moral behaviour; language; culture; and conscience—several of which Darwin argued had originated due to the unusual ways natural selection operates in social animals, that is, by different kinds of group selection , including kin selection and reciprocal altruism . Initially conceived as groundwork for one book, Darwin's psychological project became so large and fruitful that he split it into two parts, the first being published as The Descent of Man, and Selection in Relation to Sex in 1871 and the second as The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals in 1872. Darwin also published pathbreaking evolutionary monographs on insect and invertebrate behaviour, and—believing that infant behaviour gives us privileged access to humans' evolutionary endowment—a seminal case-study of his baby son William's behaviour, containing many observations confirmed by recent research, including those on: infant-adult communication and meta-communication ; infant emotional expressions; early reasoning; the experimental study of infant jealousy; and the origins of self-knowledge. Darwin's evolutionary psychological publications inspired many of the founders of modern psychology, including: Sigmund Freud and his theories of psychoanalysis , particularly as relating to the Oedipus complex and group psychology ; both the physiological and folk psychologies of Wilhelm Wundt ; William James 's functionalist approach to psychology; [ 14 ] the genetic psychology of James Mark Baldwin and thus, indirectly, Jean Piaget ; the social behaviourism or symbolic interactionism of George Herbert Mead which set out from Mead's appropriation of Darwin's treatment of gesture and attitude in his book on Expression ; and the study of evolved 'instinctive' behaviour in animals—a major topic in On the Origin of Species —known today as ethology and pioneered by Konrad Lorenz , Karl von Frisch and Niko Tinbergen . More recently, Darwin's research on his baby son inspired Colwyn Trevarthen 's observational approach to infancy and his theory of innate intersubjectivity . Overall, Darwin's theories of evolution, adaptation, and natural selection have provided and continue to provide many insights into why minds and brains function the way they do. [ 20 ] 20th century evolutionary psychologies mostly bypass Darwin's extensive evolutionary treatment of human psychology, drawing instead from: the biological sciences of their day—especially 20th century evolutionary theory as it is imagined to relate to ancient human environments; the study of paleoanthropology ; ethology ; and various human sciences, most obviously cognitive psychology . For example, writing from a gene-centred perspective on evolution , W.D. Hamilton's (1964) papers on inclusive fitness and Robert Trivers 's (1972) [ 21 ] theories on reciprocity and parental investment helped to re-establish evolutionary thinking in psychology and the other social sciences, though without reference to the place of parental investment , reciprocal altruism and kin selection in Darwin's psychology. [ 22 ] Likewise, in 1975, Edward O. Wilson combined evolutionary theory with studies of animal and social behavior, principally referencing the works of Lorenz and Tinbergen, in his book Sociobiology: The New Synthesis . In the 1970s, two major branches of ethology developed. Firstly, the study of animal social behavior (including humans) generated sociobiology , defined by its pre-eminent proponent Edward O. Wilson in 1975 as "the systematic study of the biological basis of all social behavior." [ 23 ] and in 1978 as "the extension of population biology and evolutionary theory to social organization." [ 24 ] Secondly, there was behavioral ecology, which placed less emphasis on social behavior; it focused on the ecological and evolutionary basis of animal and human behavior. In the 1970s and 1980s, university departments began to include the term evolutionary biology in their titles. The modern era of evolutionary psychology was ushered in, in particular, by Donald Symons ' 1979 book The Evolution of Human Sexuality and Leda Cosmides and John Tooby 's 1992 book The Adapted Mind . [ 14 ] David Buller observed that the term "evolutionary psychology" is sometimes seen as denoting research based on the specific methodological and theoretical commitments of certain researchers from the Santa Barbara school (University of California), thus some evolutionary psychologists prefer to term their work "human ecology", "human behavioural ecology" or "evolutionary anthropology" instead. [ 25 ] In psychology, there are the primary streams of developmental , social , and cognitive psychology. Establishing some measure of the relative influence of genetics and environment on behavior has been at the core of behavioral genetics and its variants, notably studies at the molecular level that examine the relationship between genes, neurotransmitters, and behavior. Dual inheritance theory (DIT), developed in the late 1970s and early 1980s, has a slightly different perspective by trying to explain how human behavior is a product of two different and interacting evolutionary processes: genetic evolution and cultural evolution . DIT is seen by some as a "middle-ground" between views that emphasize human universals versus those that emphasize cultural variation. [ 26 ] Theoretical foundations [ edit ] Main article: Theoretical foundations of evolutionary psychology The theories on which evolutionary psychology is based originated with Charles Darwin's work, including his speculations about the evolutionary origins of social instincts in humans. Modern evolutionary psychology, however, is possible only because of advances in evolutionary theory in the 20th century. Evolutionary psychologists say that natural selection has provided humans with many psychological adaptations, much the same way it has generated humans' anatomical and physiological adaptations. As with adaptations in general, psychological adaptations are said to be specialized for the environment in which an organism evolved, the environment of evolutionary adaptedness. [ 27 ] Sexual selection provides organisms with adaptations related to mating. For male mammals , which have a relatively high maximal potential reproduction rate, sexual selection leads to adaptations that help them compete for females. For female mammals, with a relatively low maximal potential reproduction rate, sexual selection leads to choosiness, which helps females select higher-quality mates. [ 28 ] Charles Darwin described both natural selection and sexual selection, and he relied on group selection to explain the evolution of altruistic (self-sacrificing) behavior. But group selection was argued to be a weak explanation by those who adopted the 20th century's individualistic gene-centred view of evolution , because it was thought that in any loosely-bonded group which lacked strong in-group dynamics (of the kind assumed by Darwin), less altruistic individuals will be more likely to survive, and the group will become less self-sacrificing as a whole. In 1964, the evolutionary biologist William D. Hamilton proposed inclusive fitness theory, emphasizing a gene-centered view of evolution . Hamilton noted that genes can increase the replication of copies of themselves into the next generation by influencing the organism's social traits in such a way that (statistically) results in helping the survival and reproduction of other copies of the same genes (most simply, identical copies in the organism's close relatives). According to Hamilton's rule , self-sacrificing behaviors (and the genes influencing them) can evolve if they typically help the organism's close relatives so much that it more than compensates for the individual animal's sacrifice. Inclusive fitness theory resolved the issue of how altruism can evolve. Other theories also help explain the evolution of altruistic behavior, including evolutionary game theory , tit-for-tat reciprocity, and generalized reciprocity. These theories help to explain the development of altruistic behavior, and account for hostility toward cheaters (individuals that take advantage of others' altruism). [ 29 ] Several mid-level evolutionary theories inform evolutionary psychology. The r/K selection theory proposes that some species prosper by having many offspring, while others follow the strategy of having fewer offspring but investing much more in each one. Humans follow the second strategy. Parental investment theory explains how parents invest more or less in individual offspring based on how successful those offspring are likely to be, and thus how much they might improve the parents' inclusive fitness. According to the Trivers–Willard hypothesis , parents in good conditions tend to invest more in sons (who are best able to take advantage of good conditions), while parents in poor conditions tend to invest more in daughters (who are