Large language model - Wikipedia Jump to content From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Type of machine learning model "LLM" redirects here. For other uses, see LLM (disambiguation) . Part of a series on Machine learning and data mining Paradigms Supervised learning Unsupervised learning Semi-supervised learning Self-supervised learning Reinforcement learning Transfer learning Meta-learning Few-shot learning Zero-shot learning Online learning Batch learning Curriculum learning Rule-based learning Neuro-symbolic AI Neuromorphic engineering Quantum machine learning Problems Classification Generative modeling Regression Clustering Dimensionality reduction Density estimation Anomaly detection Data cleaning AutoML Association rules Semantic analysis Structured prediction Feature engineering Feature learning Learning to rank Grammar induction Ontology learning Multimodal learning Supervised learning ( classification • regression ) Apprenticeship learning Decision trees Ensembles Bagging Boosting Random forest k -NN Linear regression Naive Bayes Artificial neural networks Logistic regression Perceptron Relevance vector machine (RVM) Support vector machine (SVM) Clustering BIRCH CURE Hierarchical k -means Fuzzy Expectation–maximization (EM) DBSCAN OPTICS Mean shift Dimensionality reduction Factor analysis Exploratory CCA ICA LDA NMF PCA PGD t-SNE SDL Structured prediction Graphical models Bayes net Conditional random field Hidden Markov Anomaly detection RANSAC k -NN Local outlier factor Isolation forest Neural networks Autoencoder Deep learning Feedforward neural network Recurrent neural network LSTM GRU ESN reservoir computing Boltzmann machine Restricted GAN Diffusion model SOM Convolutional neural network U-Net LeNet AlexNet DeepDream Neural field Neural radiance field Physics-informed neural networks Transformer Vision Mamba Spiking neural network Memtransistor Electrochemical RAM (ECRAM) Reinforcement learning Q-learning Policy gradient SARSA Temporal difference (TD) Multi-agent Self-play Learning with humans Active learning Crowdsourcing Human-in-the-loop Mechanistic interpretability RLHF Model diagnostics Coefficient of determination Confusion matrix Learning curve ROC curve Mathematical foundations Kernel machines Bias–variance tradeoff Computational learning theory Empirical risk minimization Occam learning PAC learning Statistical learning VC theory Topological deep learning Journals and conferences AAAI CVPR ECCV ECML PKDD EMNLP ICCV NeurIPS ICML ICLR IJCAI ML JMLR Related articles Glossary of artificial intelligence List of datasets for machine-learning research List of datasets in computer vision and image processing Outline of machine learning v t e A large language model ( LLM ) is an AI model (typically a neural network ) trained on a vast amount of text for natural language processing tasks, especially language generation . LLMs can typically generate, summarize, translate, and analyze text in many contexts. [ 1 ] They are the basis for many modern chatbots , such as ChatGPT , Claude , Gemini , Grok , and DeepSeek . LLMs are typically based on transformer architecture. [ 2 ] Generative pre-trained transformers (GPTs) are a type of LLM that is pre-trained to predict the next word. [ 3 ] GPTs are then often fine-tuned to follow instructions and to behave as assistants. [ 4 ] Biased or inaccurate training data can make an LLM's output less reliable. A software harness can provide LLMs with memory and access to tools such as web search. Benchmark evaluations for LLMs attempt to measure model reasoning , factual accuracy, alignment , and safety . History [ edit ] The number of publications about large language models by year grouped by publication types The training compute of notable large models in FLOPs vs publication date over the period 2010–2024. For overall notable models (top left), frontier models (top right), top language models (bottom left) and top models within leading companies (bottom right). The majority of these models are language models. The training compute of notable large AI models in FLOPs vs publication date over the period 2017–2024. The majority of large models are language models or multimodal models with language capacity. Before the emergence of transformer -based models in 2017, some language models were considered large relative to the computational and data constraints of their time. In the early 1990s, IBM 's statistical models pioneered word alignment techniques for machine translation, laying the groundwork for corpus-based language modeling . In 2001, a smoothed n -gram model , such as those employing Kneser–Ney smoothing , trained on 300 million words, achieved state-of-the-art perplexity on benchmark tests. [ 5 ] During the 2000s, with the rise of widespread internet access , researchers began compiling massive text datasets from the web ("web as corpus" [ 6 ] ) to train statistical language models. [ 7 ] [ 8 ] Moving beyond n -gram models, researchers started in 2000 to use neural networks as language models. [ 9 ] Following the breakthrough of deep neural networks in image classification around 2012, [ 10 ] similar architectures were adapted for language tasks. This shift was marked by the development of word embeddings (e.g., Word2Vec by Mikolov in 2013) and sequence-to-sequence ( seq2seq ) models using LSTM . In 2016, Google transitioned its translation service to neural machine translation (NMT), replacing statistical phrase-based models with deep recurrent neural networks . These early NMT systems used LSTM-based encoder-decoder architectures , as they preceded the invention of transformers . An illustration of the main components of the transformer model from the original paper, where layers were normalized after (instead of before) multiheaded attention At the 2017 NeurIPS conference, Google researchers introduced the transformer architecture in their landmark paper " Attention Is All You Need ". [ 11 ] This paper's goal was to improve upon 2014 seq2seq technology, and was based mainly on the attention mechanism developed by Bahdanau et al. in 2014. [ 12 ] [ 13 ] The following year in 2018, BERT was introduced and quickly became "ubiquitous". [ 14 ] Though the original transformer has both encoder and decoder blocks, BERT is an encoder-only model. Academic and research usage of BERT began to decline in 2023, following rapid improvements in the abilities of decoder-only models (such as GPT) to solve tasks via prompting . [ 15 ] Although decoder-only GPT-1 was introduced in 2018, it was GPT-2 in 2019 that caught widespread attention because OpenAI claimed to have initially deemed it too powerful to release publicly, out of fear of malicious use. [ 16 ] GPT-3 in 2020 went a step further and as of 2025 [ update ] is available only via API with no offering of downloading the model to execute locally. But it was the consumer-facing chatbot ChatGPT in late 2022 that received extensive media coverage and public attention by 2023. [ 17 ] The 2023 GPT-4 was praised for its increased accuracy and as a "holy grail" for its multimodal capabilities. [ 18 ] OpenAI did not reveal the high-level architecture and the number of parameters of GPT-4. The release of ChatGPT led to an uptick in LLM usage across several research subfields of computer science, including robotics, software engineering, and societal impact work. [ 15 ] In 2024, OpenAI released the reasoning model OpenAI o1 , which generates long chains of thought before returning a final answer. [ 19 ] Many LLMs with parameter counts comparable to those of OpenAI's GPT series have been developed. [ 20 ] Since 2022, open-source models (those with their source code and weights made publicly available) have been gaining popularity, especially at first with BLOOM and LLaMA , though both have restrictions on the field of use. Mistral AI 's open-weight models Mistral 7B and Mixtral 8x7B have a more permissive Apache License . [ citation needed ] In January 2025, DeepSeek released DeepSeek R1, a 671-billion-parameter open-weight model that performs comparably to OpenAI o1 but at a much lower price per token for users. [ 21 ] Since 2023, many LLMs have been trained to be multimodal , having the ability to also process or generate other types of data, such as images, audio, or 3D meshes. [ citation needed ] Open-weight LLMs have become more influential since 2023. Per Vake et al. (2025), community-driven contributions to open-weight models improve their efficiency and performance via collaborative platforms such as Hugging Face . [ 22 ] Dataset preprocessing [ edit ] See also: List of datasets for machine-learning research § Internet Tokenization [ edit ] As machine learning algorithms process numbers rather than text, the text must be converted to numbers. In the first step, a vocabulary is decided upon, then integer indices are arbitrarily but uniquely assigned to each vocabulary entry, and finally, an embedding is associated with the integer index. Algorithms include byte-pair encoding (BPE) and WordPiece. There are also special tokens serving as control characters , such as [MASK] for masked-out token (as used in BERT ), and [UNK] ("unknown") for characters not appearing in the vocabulary. Also, some special symbols are used to denote special text formatting. For example, "Ġ" denotes a preceding whitespace in RoBERTa and GPT and "##" denotes continuation of a preceding word in BERT. [ 23 ] For example, the BPE tokenizer used by the legacy version of GPT-3 would split tokenizer: texts -> series of numerical "tokens" as token izer : texts -> series of numerical " t ok ens " Tokenization also compresses the datasets. Because LLMs generally require input to be an array that is not jagged , the shorter texts must be "padded" until they match the length of the longest one. Byte-pair encoding [ edit ] Main article: Byte-pair encoding As an example, consider a tokenizer based on byte-pair encoding. In the first step, all unique characters (including blanks and punctuation marks ) are treated as an initial set of n -grams (i.e. initial set of uni-grams). Successively the most frequent pair of adjacent characters is merged into a bi-gram and all instances of the pair are replaced by it. All occurrences of adjacent pairs of (previously merged) n -grams that most frequently occur together are then again merged into even lengthier n -gram, until a vocabulary of prescribed size is obtained. After a tokenizer is trained, any text can be tokenized by it, as long as it does not contain characters not appearing in the initial-set of uni-grams. [ 24 ] Dataset cleaning [ edit ] Main article: Data cleansing In the context of training LLMs, datasets are typically cleaned by removing low-quality, duplicated, or toxic data. [ 25 ] Cleaned datasets can increase training efficiency and lead to improved downstream performance. [ 26 ] A trained LLM can be used to clean datasets for training a further LLM. [ 27 ] With the increasing proportion of LLM-generated content on the web, data cleaning in the future may include filtering out such content. LLM-generated content can pose a problem if the content is similar to human text (making filtering difficult) but of lower quality (degrading performance of models trained on it). [ 1 ] Synthetic data [ edit ] Main article: Synthetic data Training of largest language models might need more linguistic data than naturally available, or that the naturally occurring data is of insufficient quality. In these cases, synthetic data might be used. Training [ edit ] See also: Fine-tuning (machine learning) and Post-training of large language models An LLM is a type of foundation model (large X model) trained on language. LLMs can be trained in different ways. In particular, GPT models are first pretrained to predict the next word on a large amount of data, before being fine-tuned. [ 3 ] Cost [ edit ] Substantial infrastructure is necessary for training the largest models. The tendency towards larger models is visible in the list of large language models . For example, the training of GPT-2 (i.e. a 1.5-billion-parameter model) in 2019 cost $50,000, while training of the PaLM (i.e. a 540-billion-parameter model) in 2022 cost $8 million, and Megatron-Turing NLG 530B (in 2021) cost around $11 million. The qualifier "large" in "large language model" is inherently vague, as there is no definitive threshold for the number of parameters required to qualify as "large". Fine-tuning [ edit ] Before being fine-tuned , most LLMs are next-token predictors. [ 28 ] The fine-tuning shapes the LLM's behavior via techniques like reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) or constitutional AI . [ 29 ] Instruction fine-tuning is a form of supervised learning used to teach LLMs to follow user instructions. In 2022, OpenAI demonstrated InstructGPT , a version of GPT-3 similarly fine-tuned to follow instructions. [ 30 ] RLHF involves training a reward model to predict which text humans prefer. Then, the LLM can be fine-tuned through reinforcement learning to better satisfy this reward model. [ 31 ] Inference [ edit ] See also: Inference § Inference engines Inference is the process of providing input to a trained large language model and receiving generated output, such as text, images, code, or other files. Hosted inference runs a language model on remote AI data centers and makes the output available to users over the Internet. Some open-weight language models can be downloaded and run locally on a personal computer. [ 32 ] The model files are stored on local storage, while during inference the model weights and other data are held in memory for processing. [ 33 ] Architecture [ edit ] LLMs are generally based on the transformer architecture, which leverages an attention mechanism that enables the model to process relationships between all elements in a sequence simultaneously, regardless of their distance from each other. [ 11 ] [ 34 ] Peng et al. (2023) proposed state-space representation models as an alternative. [ 35 ] Attention mechanism and context window [ edit ] See also: Attention (machine learning) When each head calculates, according to its own criteria, how much other tokens are relevant for the "it_" token, note that the second attention head, represented by the second column, is focusing most on the first two rows, i.e. the tokens "The" and "animal", while the third column is focusing most on the bottom two rows, i.e. on "tired", which has been tokenized into two tokens. [ 36 ] In order to find out which tokens are relevant to each other within the scope of the context window , the attention mechanism calculates "soft" weights for each token, more precisely for its embedding, by using multiple attention heads, each with its own "relevance" for calculating its own soft weights. For example, the small (i.e. 117M parameter sized) GPT-2 model has had twelve attention heads and a context window of only 1k tokens. [ 37 ] Autoregressive models, such as GPTs , are trained to guess how a sequence continues; for example, whether the word sequence "I like to eat" is more likely to be followed by the word "bread" or the word "rocks". Masked models, such as BERT, [ 38 ] are trained to guess parts that are missing from a sequence, such as whether the missing word in "I like to ___ roses" is more likely to be the word "smell" or the word "eat". The model's predictions are based on the properties of sequences within its training dataset. [ 39 ] Mixture of experts [ edit ] Main article: Mixture of experts A mixture of experts (MoE) is a machine learning architecture in which multiple specialized neural networks ("experts") work together, with a gating mechanism that routes each input to the most appropriate expert(s). Mixtures of experts can reduce inference costs, as only a fraction of the parameters are used for each input. [ 40 ] Parameter size [ edit ] See also: 1.58-bit large language model Typically, LLMs are trained with single or half-precision floating point numbers (float32 and float16). One float16 has 16 bits, or 2 bytes, and so one billion parameters require 2 gigabytes. The largest models typically have more than 100 billion parameters, which places them outside the range of most consumer electronics. [ 41 ] In 2021, Google Brain released Switch Transformer, one of the first natural language processing (NLP) models to cross one trillion parameters. [ 42 ] As of July 2026 [ update ] , the largest open weight frontier model is Kimi K3 , developed by Moonshot AI , at 2.8 trillion parameters. [ 43 ] According to industry estimates reported by the Financial Times , Anthropic 's Claude Mythos , its most powerful model, restricted from public access, has approximately 8 trillion parameters , while its public 'Mythos-class' model Fable 5 has approximately 5 trillion parameters. [ 44 ] [ 45 ] [ 46 ] Quantization [ edit ] Post-training quantization [ 47 ] aims to decrease the space requirement by lowering precision of the parameters of a trained model, while preserving most of its performance. Quantization can be further classified as static quantization if the quantization parameters are determined beforehand (typically during a calibration phase), and dynamic quantization if the quantization is applied during inference. The simplest form of quantization simply truncates all the parameters to a given number of bits: this is applicable to static as well as dynamic quantization, but loses much precision. Dynamic quantization allows for the use of a different quantization codebook per layer, either a lookup table of values or a linear mapping (scaling factor and bias), at the cost of foregoing the possible speed improvements from using lower-precision arithmetic. [ citation needed ] It is possible to fine-tune quantized models using low-rank adaptation . [ 48 ] Extensibility [ edit ] Beyond basic text generation, various techniques have been developed to extend LLM capabilities, including the use of external tools and data sources, improved reasoning on complex problems, and enhanced instruction-following or autonomy through prompting methods. Prompt engineering [ edit ] Main article: Prompt engineering In 2020, OpenAI researchers demonstrated that their new model GPT-3 could understand what format to use given a few rounds of Q and A (or other type of task) in the input data as example, thanks in part due to the RLHF technique. This technique, called few-shot prompting , allows LLMs to be adapted to any task without requiring fine-tuning. [ 1 ] Also in 2022, it was found that the base GPT-3 model can generate an instruction based on user input. The generated instruction along with user input is then used as input to another instance of the model under a "Instruction: [...], Input: [...], Output:" format. The other instance is able to complete the output and often produces the correct answer in doing so. The ability to "self-instruct" makes LLMs able to bootstrap themselves toward a correct answer. [ 49 ] Dialogue processing (chatbot) [ edit ] An LLM can be turned into a chatbot by specializing it for conversation. User input is prefixed with a marker such as "Q:" or "User:" and the LLM is asked to predict the output after a fixed "A:" or "Assistant:". This type of model became commercially available in 2022 with ChatGPT, a sibling model of InstructGPT fine-tuned to accept and produce dialog-formatted text based on GPT-3.5. It could similarly follow user instructions. Before the stream of User and Assistant lines, a chat context usually starts with a few lines of overarching instructions, from a role called "developer" or "system" to convey a higher authority than the user's input. This is called a "system prompt". [ citation needed ] Retrieval-augmented generation [ edit ] Retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) is an approach that integrates LLMs with document retrieval systems. Given a query, a document retriever is called to retrieve the m