Antipositivism - Wikipedia Jump to content From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Theoretical stance in social science This article needs more citations . Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed . Find sources: "Antipositivism" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( November 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Research Research design Ethics Proposal Question Writing Argument Referencing Research strategy Interdisciplinary Multimethodology Qualitative Art-based Quantitative Philosophical schools Antipositivism Constructivism Critical rationalism Empiricism Fallibilism Positivism Postpositivism Pragmatism Realism Critical realism Subtle realism Methodology Action research Art methodology Critical theory Grounded theory Hermeneutics Historiography Human subject research Narrative inquiry Phenomenology Pragmatism Scientific method Methods Analysis Case study Content analysis Descriptive statistics Discourse analysis Ethnography Autoethnography Experiment Field experiment Social experiment Quasi-experiment Field research Historical method Inferential statistics Interviews Mapping Cultural mapping Phenomenography Secondary research Bibliometrics Literature review Meta-analysis Scoping review Systematic review Scientific modelling Simulation Survey Tools and software Argument technology GIS software LIS software Bibliometrics Reference management Science software Qualitative data analysis Simulation Statistics Philosophy portal v t e In social science , antipositivism (also interpretivism , negativism [ citation needed ] or antinaturalism ) is a theoretical stance which proposes that the social realm cannot be studied with the methods of investigation utilized within the natural sciences , and that investigation of the social realm requires a different epistemology . Fundamental to that antipositivist epistemology is the belief that the concepts and language researchers use in their research shape their perceptions of the social world they are investigating and seeking to define. [ 1 ] Interpretivism (anti-positivism) developed among researchers dissatisfied with post-positivism , the theories of which they considered too general and ill-suited to reflect the nuance and variability found in human interaction. Because the values and beliefs of researchers cannot fully be removed from their inquiry, interpretivists believe research on human beings by human beings cannot yield objective results. Thus, rather than seeking an objective perspective, interpretivists look for meaning in the subjective experiences of individuals engaging in social interaction [ 2 ] . Many interpretivist researchers immerse themselves in the social context they are studying, seeking to understand and formulate theories about a community or group of individuals by observing them from the inside. Interpretivism is an inductive practice influenced by philosophical frameworks such as hermeneutics , phenomenology , and symbolic interactionism . [ 3 ] Interpretive methods are used in many fields of the social sciences, including human geography , sociology , political science , cultural anthropology , among others. History [ edit ] Beginning with Giambattista Vico , in the early eighteenth century, and later with Montesquieu , the study of natural history and human history were separate fields of intellectual enquiry. Natural history is not under human control, whereas human history is a human creation. As such, antipositivism is informed by an epistemological distinction between the natural world and the social realm. The natural world can only be understood by its external characteristics, whereas the social realm can be understood externally and internally, and thus can be known. [ 4 ] In the early nineteenth century, intellectuals, led by the Hegelians , questioned the prospect of empirical social analysis. [ clarification needed ] [ citation needed ] Karl Marx died before the establishment of formal social science, but nonetheless rejected the sociological positivism of Auguste Comte —despite his attempt to establish a historical materialist science of society. [ 5 ] The enhanced positivism of Émile Durkheim served as foundation of modern academic sociology and social research , yet retained many mechanical elements of its predecessor. [ clarification needed ] Hermeneuticians such as Wilhelm Dilthey theorized in detail on the distinction between natural and social science (' Geisteswissenschaft '), whilst neo-Kantian philosophers such as Heinrich Rickert maintained that the social realm, with its abstract meanings and symbolisms, is inconsistent with scientific methods of analysis. Edmund Husserl , meanwhile, negated positivism through the rubric of phenomenology . [ 6 ] At the turn of the twentieth century, the first wave of German sociologists formally introduced verstehende (interpretive) sociological antipositivism, proposing research should concentrate on human cultural norms , values , symbols , and social processes viewed from a resolutely subjective perspective. [ 7 ] [ clarification needed ] As an antipositivist, however, one seeks relationships that are not as "ahistorical, invariant, or generalizable" [ 8 ] [ failed verification ] as those pursued by natural scientists. The interaction between theory (or constructed concepts ) and data is always fundamental in social science and this subjection distinguishes it from physical science. [ according to whom? ] Durkheim himself noted the importance of constructing concepts in the abstract (e.g. " collective consciousness " and " social anomie ") in order to form workable categories for experimentation. [ clarification needed ] Both Weber and Georg Simmel pioneered the verstehen (or 'interpretative') approach toward social science; a systematic process in which an outside observer attempts to relate to a particular cultural group, or indigenous people, on their own terms and from their own point of view. [ 7 ] [Sociology is ] ... the science whose object is to interpret the meaning of social action and thereby give a causal explanation of the way in which the action proceeds and the effects which it produces . By 'action' in this definition is meant the human behaviour when and to the extent the agent or agents see it as subjectively meaningful ... the meaning to which we refer may be either (a) the meaning actually intended either by an individual agent on a particular historical occasion or by a number of agents on an approximate average in a given set of cases, or (b) the meaning attributed to the agent or agents, as types, in a pure type constructed in the abstract. In neither case is the 'meaning' thought of as somehow objectively 'correct' or 'true' by some metaphysical criterion. This is the difference between the empirical sciences of action, such as sociology and history, and any kind of a priori discipline, such as jurisprudence, logic, ethics, or aesthetics whose aim is to extract from their subject-matter 'correct' or 'valid' meaning. — Max Weber , The Nature of Social Action 1922 [ 9 ] Through the work of Simmel in particular, sociology acquired a possible character beyond positivist data-collection or grand, deterministic systems of structural law. Relatively isolated from the sociological academy throughout his lifetime, Simmel presented idiosyncratic analyses of modernity more reminiscent of the phenomenological and existential writers than of Comte or Durkheim , paying particular concern to the forms of, and possibilities for, social individuality. [ 10 ] His sociology engaged in a neo-Kantian critique of the limits of human perception. [ 11 ] Antipositivism thus holds there is no methodological unity of the sciences: the three goals of positivism – description, control, and prediction – are incomplete, since they lack any understanding . [ citation needed ] Science aims at understanding causality so control can be exerted. If this succeeded in sociology, those with knowledge would be able to control the ignorant and this could lead to social engineering . [ according to whom? ] This perspective has led to controversy over how one can draw the line between subjective and objective research, much less draw an artificial line between environment and human organization (see environmental sociology ), and influenced the study of hermeneutics . The base concepts of antipositivism have expanded beyond the scope of social science , in fact, phenomenology has the same basic principles at its core. Simply put, positivists see sociology as a science, while anti-positivists do not. [ 12 ] Frankfurt School [ edit ] Part of a series on the Frankfurt School Major works Dialectic of Enlightenment Eclipse of Reason Eros and Civilization Escape from Freedom Minima Moralia Negative Dialectics One-Dimensional Man Reason and Revolution The Structural Transformation of the Public Sphere The Theory of Communicative Action " The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction " Notable theorists Adorno Apel Benjamin Fromm Forst Grünberg Geuss Habermas Honneth Horkheimer Jaeggi Kluge Kracauer Kirchheimer Kompridis Kuhlmann Löwenthal Marcuse McCarthy Negt Neumann Offe Pollock Schmidt Sohn-Rethel Wellmer Wingert Important concepts Advanced capitalism Antipositivism Communicative rationality Critical theory Culture industry Dialectic Legitimation crisis Non-identity Popular culture Praxis Privatism Psychoanalysis Related topics Cultural Marxism conspiracy theory Freudo-Marxism Marxist humanism Recognition Reification Social alienation Western Marxism Philosophy portal Society portal v t e The antipositivist tradition continued in the establishment of critical theory , particularly the work associated with the Frankfurt School of social research. Antipositivism would be further facilitated by rejections of ' scientism '; or science as ideology . Jürgen Habermas argues, in his On the Logic of the Social Sciences (1967), that Outhwaite, William, 1988 Habermas: Key Contemporary Thinkers , Polity Press (Second Edition 2009), {{ISBN|978-0-7456-4328-1}} p. 22 /ref>"}},"i":0}}]}'/> the positivist thesis of unified science, which assimilates all the sciences to a natural-scientific model, fails because of the intimate relationship between the social sciences and history, and the fact that they are based on a situation-specific understanding of meaning that can be explicated only hermeneutically ... access to a symbolically prestructured reality cannot be gained by observation alone. [ 13 ] The sociologist Zygmunt Bauman argued that John Scott. Fifty Key Sociologists: The Contemporary Theorists. Routledge. 2006. p. 19 /ref>"}},"i":0}}]}'/> our innate tendency to express moral concern and identify with the Other's wants is stifled in modernity by positivistic science and dogmatic bureaucracy. If the Other does not 'fit in' to modernity's approved classifications, it is liable to be extinguished. [ 14 ] See also [ edit ] Society portal Critical theory Grounded theory Holism Humanistic sociology Methodological dualism Philosophy of social science Poststructuralism Social action Sociology of science Symbolic interactionism References [ edit ] ↑ Macionis, John J.; Gerber, Linda M. (2011). Sociology (7th Canadian ed.). Toronto: Pearson Canada. p. 32. ISBN 978-0-13-700161-3 . ↑ Pretorius, L. (2024). Demystifying research paradigms: Navigating ontology, epistemology, and axiology in research. The Qualitative Report, 29 (10), 2698-2715. https://doi.org/10.46743/2160-3715/2024.7632 ↑ Miller, K. (2004). Interpretive Perspectives on Theory Development. In Communication Theories: Perspectives, Processes, and Contexts (pp. 46–59). Boston, Massachusetts: McGraw-Hill. ↑ Hamilton, Peter (1974). Knowledge and Social Structure . London: Routledge and Kegan Paul. pp. 4 . ISBN 978-0710077462 . ↑ Jordan, Zbigniew A. (1967). The Evolution of Dialectical Materialism: A Philosophical and Sociological Analysis . New York: Macmillan. pp. 131 , 321. ↑ Outhwaite, William, 1988 Habermas: Key Contemporary Thinkers , Polity Press (Second Edition 2009), ISBN 978-0-7456-4328-1 pp. 20–25 1 2 Rosa, Francisco Javier Ullan de la (1 April 2017). "The "false" debate between positivism and Verstehen in the origins of sociology" . Human Affairs . 27 (3): 344– 362. doi : 10.1515/humaff-2017-0028 . hdl : 10045/83987 . ISSN 1337-401X . S2CID 199061702 . ↑ Ashley D, Orenstein DM (2005). Sociological theory: Classical statements (6th ed.) . Boston: Pearson Education. p. 241. ↑ Weber, Max The Nature of Social Action in Runciman, W.G. 'Weber: Selections in Translation' Cambridge University Press, 1991. p. 7. ↑ Levine, Donald (ed) 'Simmel: On individuality and social forms' Chicago University Press, 1971. p. xix. ↑ Levine, Donald (ed) 'Simmel: On individuality and social forms' Chicago University Press, 1971. p. 6. ↑ Robertson, Susan (30 April 2020). "Module 2: Introducing the Sociological Perspective" . {{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires | journal= ( help ) ↑ Outhwaite, William, 1988 Habermas: Key Contemporary Thinkers , Polity Press (Second Edition 2009), ISBN 978-0-7456-4328-1 p. 22 ↑ John Scott. Fifty Key Sociologists: The Contemporary Theorists. Routledge. 2006. p. 19 v t e Humanities Disciplines Anthropology Archaeology Classical studies History Language arts Literature Poetry Rhetoric Law Performing arts Dance Music Theatre Philosophy Religious studies Visual arts Filmmaking Painting Sculpture Interdisciplinary fields Digital Environmental Health Medical Public Themes Abductive reasoning Aesthetics Antipositivism The arts Beauty Belles-lettres Bildung Creativity Critical theory Criticism Cultural literacy Culture High Pop General knowledge Hermeneutics Historicism Historism Human condition Humanitas Liberal arts education Trivium Quadrivium Metaphysics Ontology Moral character Self-realization Self-reflection Wisdom Work of art Journals American Journal of Archaeology Daedalus History of Humanities Humanitas Humanities and Social Sciences Communications Journal of Controversial Ideas Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society Leonardo Nova Religio Revue des Études Arméniennes Teaching Philosophy more... Academia Arts and Humanities Research Council Human science Geisteswissenschaft Humanities, arts, and social sciences Master of Humanities Moscow University for the Humanities National Endowment for the Humanities National Humanities Medal Related Criticism of mass culture Educational essentialism Humanism Anti Renaissance Humanities in the United States List of people considered a founder in a humanities field Outline of the humanities Philistinism Studia Humanitatis Category Commons v t e Positivism Perspectives Antihumanism Empiricism Rationalism Scientism Declinations Legal positivism Logical positivism Positivist school Postpositivism Sociological positivism Machian positivism (empirio-criticism) Rankean historical positivism Polish positivism Russian Machism Principal concepts Consilience Demarcation Evidence Induction Justification Pseudoscience Critique of metaphysics Unity of science Verificationism Antitheses Antipositivism Confirmation holism Critical theory Falsifiability Geisteswissenschaft Hermeneutics Historicism Historism Human science Humanities Metaphysics Methodological dualism Problem of induction Reflectivism Related paradigm shifts in the history of science Non-Euclidean geometry (1830s) Uncertainty principle (1927) Related topics Behavioralism Post-behavioralism Critical rationalism Criticism of science Epistemology anarchism idealism nihilism pluralism realism Holism Instrumentalism Modernism Naturalism in literature Nomothetic–idiographic distinction Objectivity in science Operationalism Phenomenalism Philosophy of science Deductive-nomological model Ramsey sentence Sense-data theory Qualitative research Relationship between religion and science Sociology Social science Philosophy Structural functionalism Structuralism Structuration theory Positivist-related debate Method Methodenstreit (1890s) Werturteilsstreit (1909–1959) Positivismusstreit (1960s) Fourth Great Debate in international relations (1980s) Science wars (1990s) Contributions The Course in Positive Philosophy (1830) A General View of Positivism (1848) Critical History of Philosophy (1869) Idealism and Positivism (1879–1884) The Analysis of Sensations (1886) The Logic of Modern Physics (1927) Language, Truth, and Logic (1936) The Two Cultures (1959) The Universe in a Nutshell (2001) Proponents Richard Avenarius A. J. Ayer Berlin Circle / Vienna Circle Alexander Bogdanov Percy Williams Bridgman Auguste Comte Eugen Dühring Émile Durkheim Stephen Hawking Ernst Laas Ernst Mach Ahmed Rıza Criticism Materialism and Empirio-criticism (1909) History and Class Consciousness (1923) The Logic of Scientific Discovery (1934) The Poverty of Historicism (1936) World Hypotheses (1942) Two Dogmas of Empiricism (1951) Truth and Method (1960) The Structure of Scientific Revolutions (1962) Conjectures and Refutations (1963) One-Dimensional Man (1964) Knowledge and Human Interests (1968) The Poverty of Theory (1978) The Scientific Image (1980) The Rhetoric of Economics (1986) Critics Theodor W. Adorno Gaston Bachelard Mario Bunge Wilhelm Dilthey Paul Feyerabend Hans-Georg Gadamer Jürgen Habermas Thomas Kuhn Vladimir Lenin György Lukács Herbert Marcuse Deirdre McCloskey Stephen Pepper Karl Popper Willard Van Orman Quine E. P. Thompson Bas van Fraassen Max Weber Concepts in contention Knowledge Objectivity Phronesis Truth Verstehen Category v t e Science and technology studies Economics Economics of science Political economy of research and innovation History History and philosophy of science History of science and technology History of technology Languages of science Scientific language Philosophy Anthropocene Antipositivism Empiricism Fuzzy logic Neo-Luddism Philosophy of science Philosophy of social science Philosophy of technology Positivism Postpositivism Religion and science Scientism Social constructivism Social epistemology Transhumanism Policy Academic freedom Digital divide Evidence-based policy Factor 10 Funding of science Horizon scanning Politicization of science Regulation of science Research ethics Right to science Science policy history of science of Technology assessment Technology policy Transition management Science studies Academic bias Antiscience Bibliometrics Boundary-work Consilience Criticism of science Demarcation problem Double hermeneutic Intellectual inbreeding Mapping controversies Metascience Paradigm shift black swan events Pseudoscience Psychology of science Replication crisis Science citizen communication education normal Neo-colonial post-normal rhetoric wars Scientific community consensus controversy dissent enterprise integrity literacy method misconduct priority skepticism Scientocracy Scientometrics Team science Traditional knowledge ecological Unity of science Women in science STEM Sociology Actor–network theory Social construction of technology shaping of technology Sociology of knowledge scientific Sociology of scientific ignorance Sociology of the history of science Sociotechnology Strong programme Technology studies Co-production Cyborg anthropology Design studies Dematerialization Digital anthropology Digital media use and mental health Early adopter Engineering studies Financial technology Hype cycle Innovation diffusion disruptive linear model system user Leapfrogging Normalization process theory Media studies Reverse salient Skunkworks project Sociotechnical system Technical change Technocracy Technoscience feminist Technological change convergence determinism revolution transitions Technology and society criticism of dynamics theories of transfer Women in engineering Category Associations Journals Scholars Portals : Philosophy Science Society Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Antipositi