What Is It Like to Be a Bat? - Wikipedia Jump to content From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1974 philosophy paper by Thomas Nagel Thomas Nagel argues that while a human might be able to imagine what it is like to be a bat by taking "the bat's point of view", it would still be impossible "to know what it is like for a bat to be a bat". " What Is It Like to Be a Bat? " is a paper by American philosopher Thomas Nagel , first published in The Philosophical Review in October 1974, and later in Nagel's Mortal Questions (1979). The paper presents several difficulties posed by phenomenal consciousness , including the potential insolubility of the mind–body problem owing to "facts beyond the reach of human concepts", the limits of objectivity and reductionism , the "phenomenological features" of subjective experience , the limits of human imagination, and what it means to be a particular, conscious thing. [ 1 ] Nagel asserts that "an organism has conscious mental states if and only if there is something that it is like to be that organism—something it is like for the organism." [ 2 ] This assertion has achieved special status in consciousness studies as "the standard 'what it's like' locution". [ 3 ] [ 4 ] Daniel Dennett , while sharply disagreeing on some points, acknowledged Nagel's paper as "the most widely cited and influential thought experiment about consciousness". [ 5 ] : 441 Thesis [ edit ] The paper's author, Thomas Nagel Nagel challenges the possibility of explaining "the most important and characteristic feature of conscious mental phenomena " by reductive materialism (the philosophical position that all statements about the mind and mental states can be translated, without any loss or change in meaning, into statements about the physical). For example, a reductive physicalist 's solution to the mind–body problem holds that whatever " consciousness " is, it can be fully described via physical processes in the brain and body. [ 6 ] Nagel begins by assuming that "conscious experience is a widespread phenomenon" present in many animals (particularly mammals ), even though it is "difficult to say [...] what provides evidence of it". Thus, Nagel sees consciousness not as something exclusively human, but as something shared by many, if not all, organisms. Nagel must be speaking of something other than sensory perception , since objective facts and widespread evidence show that organisms with sensory organs have biological processes of sensory perception. In fact, what all organisms share, according to Nagel, is what he calls the "subjective character of experience" defined as follows: "An organism has conscious mental states if and only if there is something that it is like to be that organism – something that it is like for the organism." [ 1 ] The paper argues that the subjective nature of consciousness undermines any attempt to explain consciousness via objective, reductionist means. The subjective character of experience cannot be explained by a system of functional or intentional states. Consciousness cannot be fully explained if the subjective character of experience is ignored, and the subjective character of experience cannot be explained by a reductionist; it is a mental phenomenon that cannot be reduced to materialism . [ 7 ] Thus, for consciousness to be explained from a reductionist stance, the idea of the subjective character of experience would have to be discarded, which is absurd . Neither can a physicalist view, because in such a world, each phenomenal experience had by a conscious being would have to have a physical property attributed to it, which is impossible to prove due to the subjectivity of conscious experience. Nagel argues that each and every subjective experience is connected with a "single point of view", making it infeasible to consider any conscious experience as "objective". Nagel uses the example of bats to clarify the distinction between subjective and objective concepts. Because bats are mammals, they are assumed to have conscious experience. Nagel was inspired to use a bat for his argument after living in a home where the animals were frequent visitors. [ citation needed ] Nagel ultimately used bats for his argument because of their highly evolved and active use of a biological sensory apparatus that is significantly different from that of many other organisms. Bats use echolocation to navigate and perceive objects. This method of perception is similar to the human sense of vision. Both sonar and vision are regarded as perceptual experiences. While it is possible to imagine what it would be like to fly, navigate by sonar, hang upside down and eat insects like a bat, that is not the same as a bat's perspective. Nagel claims that even if humans were able to metamorphose gradually into bats, their brains would not have been wired as a bat's from birth; therefore, they would only be able to experience the life and behaviors of a bat, rather than the mindset. [ 8 ] Such is the difference between subjective and objective points of view. According to Nagel, "our own mental activity is the only unquestionable fact of our experience", meaning that each individual only knows what it is like to be them ( subjectivism ). Objectivity requires an unbiased, non-subjective state of perception. For Nagel, the objective perspective is not feasible, because humans are limited to subjective experience. Nagel concludes with the contention that it would be wrong to assume that physicalism is incorrect, since that position is also imperfectly understood. Physicalism claims that states and events are physical, but those physical states and events are only imperfectly characterized. Nevertheless, he holds that physicalism cannot be understood without characterizing objective and subjective experience. That is a necessary precondition for understanding the mind–body problem . Criticisms [ edit ] Daniel Dennett has been a vocal critic of the paper's assertions. Daniel Dennett denied Nagel's claim that the bat's consciousness is inaccessible, contending that any "interesting or theoretically important" features of a bat's consciousness would be amenable to third-person observation. [ 5 ] : 442 For instance, it is clear that bats cannot detect objects more than a few meters away because echolocation has a limited range. Dennett holds that any similar aspects of its experiences could be gleaned by further scientific experiments. [ 5 ] : 443 He has also pointed out [ 9 ] that Nagel's argument and question were not new, but had previously been stated by B. A. Farrell in his 1950 article "Experience", published in the journal Mind . [ 10 ] Kathleen Akins similarly argued that many questions about a bat's subjective experience hinge on unanswered questions about the neuroscientific details of a bat's brain (such as the function of cortical activity profiles), and Nagel is too quick in ruling these out as answers to his central question. [ 11 ] [ 12 ] Peter Hacker analyzes Nagel's statement as not only "malconstructed" but philosophically "misconceived" as a definition of consciousness, [ 13 ] and he asserts that Nagel's paper "laid the groundwork for ... forty years of fresh confusion about consciousness". [ 14 ] : 13 Eric Schwitzgebel and Michael S. Gordon have argued that, contrary to Nagel, normal sighted humans do use echolocation much like bats – it is just that it is generally done without one's awareness. They use this to argue that normal people in normal circumstances can be grossly and systematically mistaken about their conscious experience. [ 15 ] See also [ edit ] Umwelt Animal consciousness Intersubjectivity Qualia References [ edit ] 1 2 Nagel, Thomas (10 March 2005). Honderich, Ted (ed.). The Oxford Companion to Philosophy . Oxford: Oxford University Press. p. 637. ISBN 978-0-19-103747-4 . ↑ Nagel, Thomas (1974). "What Is It Like to Be a Bat?" . The Philosophical Review . 83 (4): 435– 450. doi : 10.2307/2183914 . JSTOR 2183914 . ↑ Levine, Joseph (2010). Review of Uriah Kriegel, Subjective Consciousness: A Self-Representational Theory. Notre Dame Philosophical Reviews 2010 (3). ↑ Droege, P. (2003). Caging the Beast: A Theory of Sensory Consciousness. Netherlands: J. Benjamins Publishing Company. p. 105 1 2 3 Dennett, Daniel C. (1991). Consciousness Explained . Boston: Little, Brown and Company. ↑ Wimsatt, William C. (1976). Reductionism, Levels of Organization, and the Mind-Body Problem . Springer. pp. 205– 267. ISBN 978-1-4684-2198-9 . ↑ "Qualia" . Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Retrieved 2015-06-01 . ↑ De Preester, Helena (2007). "The deep bodily origins of the subjective perspective: Models and their problems". Consciousness and Cognition . 16 (3): 604– 618. doi : 10.1016/j.concog.2007.05.002 . PMID 17590352 . S2CID 29775824 . ↑ Daniel C. Dennett, Elbow Room – The Varieties of Free Will Worth Wanting (Clarendon Press 1984), p17 ↑ Farrell, B. A. (1950). Experience. Mind 59 (April):170–198. ↑ Bickle, John; Mandik, Peter; Landreth, Anthony. "The Philosophy of Neuroscience" . Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Stanford University Press . Retrieved 2 September 2020 . Kathleen Akins (1993a) delved deeper into existing knowledge of bat physiology and reports much that is pertinent to Nagel's question. She argued that many of the questions about bat subjective experience that we still consider open hinge on questions that remain unanswered about neuroscientific details. One example of the latter is the function of various cortical activity profiles in the active bat. ↑ Akins, Kathleen (1993). "What is it Like to be Boring and Myopic". In Dahlbom, Bo (ed.). Dennett and His Critics: Demystifying Mind (PDF) . Cambridge, MA: Basil Blackwell. pp. 125– 160. ISBN 0-631-18549-6 . ↑ Hacker, P. M. S. (2002). "Is there anything it is like to be a bat?" (PDF) . Philosophy . 77 (2): 157– 174. doi : 10.1017/s0031819102000220 . S2CID 146317907 . ↑ Hacker, P. M. S. (2012). "The Sad and Sorry History of Consciousness: being, among other things, a challenge to the "consciousness-studies community" " (PDF) . Royal Institute of Philosophy . supplementary volume 70. ↑ Schwitzgebel, Eric ; Gordon, Michael S. (2000). "How Well Do We Know Our Own Conscious Experience?: The Case of Human Echolocation" . Philosophical Topics . 28 (2): 235– 246. doi : 10.5840/philtopics20002824 . Further reading [ edit ] "What is it like to be a bat?" . Philosophical Review . LXXXIII (4): 435– 450. Oct 1974. doi : 10.2307/2183914 . JSTOR 2183914 . Hacker, P. M. S. (2002). "Is there anything it is like to be a bat?" (PDF) . Philosophy . 77 (2): 157– 174. doi : 10.1017/s0031819102000220 . S2CID 146317907 . Schwitzgebel, Eric (2020-12-23). "Is There Something It's Like to Be a Garden Snail?" (PDF) . v t e Philosophy Branches Applied philosophy Logic Metaphilosophy Philosophical methodology Philosophy of education Philosophy of information Philosophy of language Philosophy of mathematics Philosophy of religion Philosophy of science Political philosophy Practical philosophy Social philosophy Theoretical philosophy Aesthetics Aesthetic response Formalism Institutionalism Epistemology Empiricism Fideism Naturalism Particularism Rationalism Skepticism Solipsism Ethics Consequentialism Deontology Morality Absolutism Nihilism Particularism Skepticism Universalism Value theory Virtue Metaphysics Dualism Free will Compatibilism Determinism Hard Incompatibilism Hard Libertarianism Reality Atomism Conceptualism Idealism Materialism Monism Naturalism Nominalism Physicalism Relativism Realism and Anti-realism Mind Behaviorism Eliminativism Emergentism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Objectivism Subjectivism Ontology Action Event Process By era Ancient Agriculturalism Chinese naturalism Confucianism Jain Anekantavada Syādvāda Legalism Logicians Mazdakism Mithraism Mohism Taoism Yangism Zoroastrianism Zurvanism Buddhist Abhidharma Madhyamaka Pudgalavada Sarvāstivadā Sautrāntika Svatantrika and Prasangika Śūnyatā Tibetan Yogacara Greek and Roman Dispositio Cyrenaics Cynicism Eretrian school Hellenistic Pyrrhonism Stoicism Epicureanism Academic Skepticism Megarian school Neopythagoreanism Platonism Academy Middle Neo Peripatetic school Pre-Socratic Ionians Pythagoreans Eleatics Atomists Sophists School of the Sextii Second Sophistic Hindu Ājīvika Ajñana Cārvāka Mīmāṃsā Nyaya Vaisheshika Samkhya Yoga Medieval Buddhist Chan Huayan Tiantai Zen Confucian Korean Neo Xuanxue Navya-Nyāya Jewish Renaissance humanism Christian Augustinianism Byzantine Occamism Scholasticism Scotism Thomism Islamic Aristotelianism Averroism Avicennism Illuminationism Judeo-Islamic Kalam Sufi Vedanta Acintya bheda abheda Advaita Bhedabheda Dvaita Nimbarka Sampradaya Shuddhadvaita Vishishtadvaita Modern Anarchism Classical Realism Collectivism Conservatism Determinism Dualism Edo neo-Confucianism Empiricism Existentialism Foundationalism Historicism Holism Humanism Anti- Idealism Absolute British German Italian Objective Subjective Transcendental Individualism Kokugaku Liberalism Materialism Modernism Monism Naturalism Natural law Nihilism New Confucianism Neo-scholasticism Pessimism Pragmatism Phenomenology Positivism Reductionism Rationalism Social contract Socialism Transcendentalism Utilitarianism People Cartesianism Kantianism Neo Kierkegaardianism Krausism Hegelianism Marxism Newtonianism Nietzscheanism Spinozism Contemporary Kyoto School Objectivism Postcritique Russian cosmism Analytic Applied ethics Analytic feminism Analytical Marxism Communitarianism Consequentialism Critical rationalism Experimental philosophy Falsificationism Foundationalism vs. coherentism Internalism and externalism Logical positivism Legal positivism Meta-ethics Moral realism Quinean naturalism Normative ethics Ordinary language philosophy Postanalytic philosophy Quietism Rawlsian Reformed epistemology Systemics Scientism Scientific realism Scientific skepticism Transactionalism Contemporary utilitarianism Vienna Circle Wittgensteinian Continental Critical theory Frankfurt School Deconstruction Existentialism Feminist Hermeneutics New Historicism Phenomenology Posthumanism Postmodernism Post-structuralism Social constructionism Structuralism Western Marxism and Neo-Marxism By region Indigenous American Aztec Georgian Romanian Russian Yugoslav African Bantu Egyptian Ethiopian Africana Eastern Chinese Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Middle Eastern Iranian Pakistani Taiwanese Vietnamese Western American Australian British Irish Scottish Canada Czech Danish Dutch Finland French German Greek Italian Maltese Polish Slovene Spanish Philosophy portal Category v t e Philosophy of mind Philosophers G. E. M. Anscombe Aristotle Armstrong Thomas Aquinas J. L. Austin Alexander Bain George Berkeley Henri Bergson Ned Block Franz Brentano C. D. Broad Tyler Burge David Chalmers Patricia Churchland Paul Churchland Andy Clark Dharmakirti Donald Davidson Daniel Dennett René Descartes Fred Dretske Fodor Goldman Martin Heidegger David Hume Edmund Husserl William James Frank Cameron Jackson Immanuel Kant David Lewis (philosopher) John Locke Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz Maurice Merleau-Ponty Marvin Minsky Thomas Nagel Alva Noë Derek Parfit Plato Hilary Putnam Richard Rorty Gilbert Ryle John Searle Wilfrid Sellars Baruch Spinoza Alan Turing Michael Tye Vasubandhu Ludwig Wittgenstein Stephen Yablo Zhuangzi more... Theories Behaviorism Biological naturalism Dualism Eliminative materialism Emergent materialism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Interactionism Naïve realism Neurophenomenology Neutral monism New mysterianism Nondualism Occasionalism Panpsychism Parallelism Phenomenalism Phenomenology Physicalism Type physicalism Property dualism Representational Solipsism Substance dualism Concepts Abstract object Animal machine Chinese room Creativity Cognition Cognitive closure Concept Consciousness Hard problem of consciousness Hypostatic abstraction Idea Identity Intelligence Artificial Human Intentionality Introspection Intuition Language of thought Mental event Mental image Mental process Mental property Mental representation Mind Mind–body problem Pain Problem of other minds Propositional attitude Qualia Tabula rasa Understanding Zombie Related Metaphysics Philosophy of artificial intelligence / information / perception / self Category Philosophers category Project Task Force v t e Ethics Normative Consequentialism Deontology Care Particularism Pragmatic Role Suffering-focused Utilitarianism Virtue Applied Animal Insects Artificial intelligence Bio Business Computer Discourse Economic Engineering Environmental Land Legal Machine Marketing Meat eating Media Medical Nursing Professional Programming Research Sexual Technology Terraforming Uncertain sentience Work Meta Absolutism Axiological Cognitivism Realism Naturalism Non-naturalism Subjectivism Ideal observer theory Divine command theory Constructivism Euthyphro dilemma Intuitionism Nihilism Non-cognitivism Emotivism Expressivism Quasi-realism Universal prescriptivism Rationalism Relativism Skepticism Universalism Value monism vs. value pluralism Schools Buddhist Christian Protestant Confucian Epicurean Existentialist Feminist Islamic Jewish Kantian Rousseauian Stoic Tao Concepts Accountability Authority Autonomy Blame Common sense Compassion Conscience Consent Culture of life Desert Dignity Double standard Duty Equality Etiquette Eudaimonia Family values Fidelity Free will Golden Rule Good and evil Good Evil Problem of evil Greed Happiness Honour Ideal Immorality Importance Justice Liberty Loyalty Moral agency Moral circle expansion Moral courage Moral hierarchy Moral imperative Morality Norm Pacifism Political freedom Precept Punishment Rights Self-discipline Suffering Stewardship Sympathy Theodicy Torture Trust Utility Value Instrumental Intrinsic Japanese Vice Virtue Vow Wrong Ethicists Confucius Mozi Socrates Plato Aristotle Diogenes Mencius Xunzi Cicero Augustine Valluvar Aquinas Spinoza Butler Hume Smith Kant Hegel Schopenhauer Bentham Mill Kierkegaard Sidgwick Nietzsche Moore Barth Tillich Bonhoeffer Foot Rawls Dewey Williams Mackie Anscombe Frankena MacIntyre Hare Singer Parfit Nagel Adams Taylor Azurmendi Korsgaard Nussbaum Works Nicomachean Ethics (c. 322 BC) Tirukkural (c. 450 CE) Ethics (1677) A Treatise of Human Nature (1740) The Theory of Moral Sentiments (1759) An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation (1780) Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals (1785) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Either/Or (1843) Utilitarianism (1861) The Methods of Ethics (1874) On the Genealogy of Morality (1887) Principia Ethica (1903) The Right and the Good (1930) A Theory of Justice (1971) Animal Liberation (1975) After Virtue (1981) Reasons and Persons (1984) Related Axiology Casuistry Descriptive ethics Ethics in religion Evolutionary ethics History of ethics Human rights Ideology Philosophy of law Moral psychology Political philosophy Population ethics Rehabilitation Secular ethics Social philosophy Category Outline Portal WikiProject v t e Consciousness Figures Philosophy Alfred North Whitehead Arthur Schopenhauer Baruch Spinoza Bertrand Russell Brian O'Shaughnessy Charles Augustus Strong Christopher Peacocke Colin McGinn Daniel Dennett David Chalmers David Hume David Papineau David Pearce Donald Davidson Douglas Hofstadter Edmund Husserl Frank Jackson Fred Dretske Galen Strawson George Berkeley George Henry Lewes Georges Rey Gottfried Leibniz Immanuel Kant Jean-Paul Sartre John Eccles John Locke John Polkinghorne John Searle Joseph Levine Karl Popper Keith Frankish Kenneth M. Sayre Maurice Merleau-Ponty Max Velmans Michael Tye Martin Heidegger Ned Block Patricia Churchland Paul Churchland Philip Goff René Descartes Thomas Metzinger Thomas Nagel William Kingdon Clifford William Lycan William Seager Psychology Carl Gustav Jung Donald D. Hoffman Franz Brentano Gustav Fechner Julian Jaynes Kurt Koffka Max Wertheimer Sigmund Freud Wilhelm Wundt William Jam