Norway Debate - Wikipedia Jump to content From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1940 debate in the British House of Commons The debate was instrumental in bringing about the resignation of the then Prime Minister, Neville Chamberlain . The Norway Debate , sometimes called the Narvik Debate , was a momentous debate in the British House of Commons from 7 to 9 May 1940, during the Second World War . The official title of the debate, as held in the Hansard parliamentary archive, is Conduct of the War . Scheduled in advance, it was initiated by an adjournment motion enabling the Commons to freely discuss the progress of the Norwegian campaign . The debate quickly brought to a head widespread dissatisfaction with the overall conduct of the war by Neville Chamberlain 's government. At the end of the second day, there was a division of the House for the members (MPs) to hold a no confidence motion . [ note 1 ] The vote was won by the government but by a drastically reduced majority. That led on 10 May to Chamberlain's resignation as prime minister , and the replacement of his war ministry by a broadly based coalition government which, under Winston Churchill , governed the United Kingdom until after the end of the war in Europe in May 1945. Chamberlain's government was criticised not only by the Opposition but also by respected members of his own Conservative Party . The Opposition forced the vote of no confidence, in which over a quarter of Conservative members voted with the Opposition or abstained , despite a three-line whip . There were calls for national unity to be established by formation of an all-party coalition, but it was not possible for Chamberlain to reach agreement with the opposition Labour and Liberal parties. They refused to serve under him, although they were willing to accept another Conservative as prime minister. After Chamberlain resigned as prime minister (he remained Conservative Party leader until October 1940), they agreed to serve under Churchill. Background [ edit ] In 1937, Neville Chamberlain, then Chancellor of the Exchequer , succeeded Stanley Baldwin as prime minister , leading a National Government overwhelmingly composed of Conservatives but supported by the small National Labour and Liberal National parties. It was opposed by the Labour and Liberal parties. Since Hitler assumed power in Germany in 1933, his Nazi Party had pursued an irredentist foreign policy. Chamberlain initially attempted to avert war by a policy of appeasement , culminating in the Munich Agreement of September 1938. This policy was abandoned after Germany ceased the use of diplomatic means to avert war, and became more overtly expansionist with the full occupation of Czechoslovakia in March 1939. One of the strongest critics of both appeasement and Nazi aggression was Conservative backbencher Winston Churchill who, although being one of the country's most prominent political figures, had last held government office in 1929. After Germany invaded Poland on 1 September 1939, the United Kingdom and France declared war on Germany two days later. Chamberlain thereupon created a war cabinet in which he appointed Churchill as First Lord of the Admiralty . It was at this point that a government supporter (possibly David Margesson , the Government Chief Whip) noted privately: [ 1 ] [ note 2 ] For two-and-a-half years, Neville Chamberlain has been Prime Minister of Great Britain. During this period Great Britain has suffered a series of diplomatic defeats and humiliations, culminating in the outbreak of European war. It is an unbroken record of failure in foreign policy, and there has been no outstanding success at home to offset the lack of it abroad. ... Yet it is probable that Neville Chamberlain still retains the confidence of the majority of his fellow country-men and that, if it were possible to obtain an accurate test of the feelings of the electorate, Chamberlain would be found the most popular statesman in the land. The British–German naval battles at Narvik on 10 and 13 April Once Germany had rapidly overrun Poland in September 1939, there was a sustained period of military inactivity for over six months dubbed the " Phoney War ". On 3 April 1940, Chamberlain said in an address to the Conservative National Union that Hitler "had missed the bus". [ 2 ] Only six days later, on 9 April, Germany launched an attack in overwhelming force on neutral and unprepared Norway after swiftly occupying Denmark. In response, Britain deployed military forces to assist the Norwegians. Churchill, as First Lord of the Admiralty, had direct responsibility for the conduct of naval operations in the Norwegian campaign . Before the German invasion, he had pressed the Cabinet to ignore Norway's neutrality, mine its territorial waters, and be prepared to seize Narvik, in both cases to disrupt the export of Swedish iron ore to Germany during winter months, when the Baltic Sea was frozen. He had, however, advised that a major landing in Norway was not realistically within Germany's powers. [ 3 ] Apart from the naval victory in the Battles of Narvik , the Norwegian campaign went badly for the British forces, generally because of poor planning and organisation, but essentially because military supplies were inadequate. As a result, from 27 April, the Anglo-French forces were obliged to evacuate. [ 4 ] When the House of Commons met on Thursday, 2 May, Labour leader Clement Attlee asked: "Is the Prime Minister now able to make a statement on the position in Norway?" Chamberlain was reluctant to discuss the military situation because of the security factors involved, but did express a hope that he and Churchill would be able to say much more next week. He went on to make an interim statement of affairs but was not forthcoming about "certain operations (that) are in progress (as) we must do nothing which might jeopardise the lives of those engaged in them". He asked the House to defer comment and question until next week. Attlee agreed, as did Liberal leader Archibald Sinclair , except that he requested a debate on Norway lasting more than a single day. [ 5 ] Attlee then presented Chamberlain with a private notice in which he requested a schedule for the next week's Commons business. Chamberlain announced that a debate on the general conduct of the war would commence on Tuesday, 7 May. [ 6 ] The debate was keenly anticipated in both Parliament and the country. In his diary entry for Monday, 6 May, Chamberlain's Assistant Private Secretary John Colville wrote that all interest centred on the debate. Obviously, he thought, the government would win through, but only after facing some very awkward points about Norway. Some of Colville's colleagues including Lord Dunglass , who was Chamberlain's Parliamentary Private Secretary (PPS) at the time, considered the government position to be sound politically, but less so in other respects. Colville worried that "the confidence of the country may be somewhat shaken". [ 7 ] 7 May: first day of the debate [ edit ] Preamble, and other business [ edit ] The Commons sitting on Tuesday, 7 May 1940, began at 14:45 with Speaker Edward FitzRoy in the Chair. [ 8 ] There followed some private business matters and numerous oral answers to questions raised, many of those being about the British Army. [ 9 ] With these matters completed, the debate on the Norwegian campaign began with a routine adjournment motion (i.e., "that this house do now adjourn"). Under Westminster rules in debates like this, wide-ranging discussions of a variety of topics are allowed, and the motion is not usually put to a vote. At 15:48, Captain David Margesson, the Government Chief Whip , made the adjournment motion. The House proceeded to openly discuss "Conduct of the War", specifically the progress of the Norwegian campaign, and Chamberlain rose to make his opening statement. [ 10 ] Chamberlain's opening speech [ edit ] Neville Chamberlain Chamberlain began by reminding the House of his statement on Thursday, 2 May, five days earlier, when it was known that British forces had been withdrawn from Åndalsnes . He was now able to confirm that they had also been withdrawn from Namsos to complete the evacuation of Allied forces from central and southern Norway (the campaign in northern Norway continued). Chamberlain attempted to treat the Allied losses as unimportant, and claimed that British soldiers "man for man (were) superior to their foes". He praised the "splendid gallantry and dash" of the British forces but acknowledged they were "exposed... to superior forces with superior equipment". [ 11 ] Chamberlain then said he proposed "to present a picture of the situation", and to "consider certain criticisms of the government". He stated that "no doubt" the withdrawal had created a shock in both the House and the country. At this point, the interruptions began as Labour member (MP) Ben Smith shouted: "And abroad", and an unnamed member added: "All over the world". [ 11 ] [ 12 ] Chamberlain sarcastically responded that "ministers, of course, must be expected to be blamed for everything". This provoked a heated reaction with several members derisively shouting: "They missed the bus!" [ 13 ] The Speaker had to call on members not to interrupt, but they continued to repeat the phrase throughout Chamberlain's speech, and he reacted with what has been described as "a rather feminine gesture of irritation". [ 14 ] He was eventually forced to defend the original usage of the phrase directly, claiming that he would have expected a German attack on the Allies at the outbreak of war, when the difference in armed power was at its greatest. [ 15 ] Chamberlain's speech has been widely criticised. Roy Jenkins calls it "a tired, defensive speech which impressed nobody". [ 16 ] Liberal MP Henry Morris-Jones said Chamberlain looked "a shattered man" who spoke without his customary self-assurance. [ 14 ] When Chamberlain insisted that "the balance of advantage lay on our side", Liberal MP Dingle Foot could not believe what he was hearing, and said Chamberlain was denying the fact that Britain had suffered a major defeat. [ 14 ] The backbench Conservative MP Leo Amery said Chamberlain's speech left the House in a restive and depressed, though not yet mutinous, state of mind. Amery believed that Chamberlain was "obviously satisfied with things as they stood"; in the government camp, the mood was actually positive as they believed they were, in John Colville's words, "going to get away with it". [ 17 ] Attlee's response to Chamberlain [ edit ] Clement Attlee responded as Leader of the Opposition . He quoted some of Chamberlain's and Churchill's recent confident assertions about the likely victory of British forces. Ministers' statements and, even more so, the press, guided (or deliberately left uncorrected) by the government, had painted far too optimistic a picture of the Norwegian campaign. [ 17 ] Given the level of confidence created, the setback had generated widespread disappointment. Attlee now raised the issue of government planning, which would be revisited by several later speakers: [ 18 ] It is said that in this war hitherto there has never been any initiative from our side, and it is said also that there is no real planning in anticipation of the possible strokes that will be taken against us. I think we must examine this affair from that aspect. Clement Attlee, Leader of the Opposition Chamberlain had announced additional powers being granted to Churchill which amounted to him having direction of the Chiefs of Staff. Attlee seized on this as an example of government incompetence, though without blaming Churchill, by saying: [ 19 ] It is against all good rules of organisation that a man who is in charge of major strategy should also be in command of a particular unit. It is like having a man commanding an army in the field and also commanding a division . He has a divided interest between the wider questions of strategy and the problems affecting his own immediate command. The First Lord of the Admiralty has great abilities, but it is not fair to him that he should be put into an impossible position like that. Attlee struck a theme here that would recur throughout the debate – that the government was incompetent but not Churchill himself, even though he was part of it, as he had suffered from what Jenkins calls a misdirection of his talents. [ 16 ] Jenkins remarks that Churchill's potential had not been fully utilised and, most importantly, he was clean of the stain of appeasement. [ 20 ] Chamberlain had been heckled during his speech for having "missed the bus", and he made his case worse by desperately trying, and failing, to excuse his use of that expression a month earlier. In doing so, he provided Attlee with an opportunity. During the conclusion of his response, Attlee said: [ 21 ] Norway follows Czechoslovakia and Poland. Everywhere the story is "too late". The Prime Minister talked about missing buses. What about all the buses which he and his associates have missed since 1931? They missed all the peace buses but caught the war bus. Attlee's closing words were a direct attack on all Conservative members, blaming them for shoring up ministers whom they knew to be failures: [ 22 ] They have allowed their loyalty to the Chief Whip to overcome their loyalty to the real needs of the country. I say that the House of Commons must take its full responsibility. I say that there is a widespread feeling in this country, not that we shall lose the war, that we will win the war, but that to win the war, we want different people at the helm from those who have led us into it. Leo Amery said later that Attlee's restraint, in not calling for a division of the House (i.e., a vote), was of greater consequence than all his criticisms because, Amery believed, it made it much easier for Conservative members to be influenced by the debate's opening day. [ 23 ] Sinclair's response to Chamberlain [ edit ] Sir Archibald Sinclair Sir Archibald Sinclair , the leader of the Liberals, then spoke. He too was critical, and began by comparing military and naval staff efficiency, which he considered proven, with political inefficiency: [ 24 ] [ note 3 ] It is my contention that this breakdown in organisation occurred because there had been no foresight in the political direction of the war and in the instructions given to the Staffs to prepare for these very difficult operations in due time, and that the Staffs were hastily improvising instead of working to long and carefully-matured plans. He drew from Chamberlain the admission that whilst troops had been held in readiness to be sent to Norway, no troopships had been retained to send them in. Sinclair gave instances of inadequate and defective equipment, and of disorganisation reported to him by servicemen returning from Norway. Chamberlain had suggested that Allied plans had failed because the Norwegians had not put up the expected resistance to the Germans. Sinclair reported that the servicemen "paid a high tribute to the courage and determination with which the Norwegians fought alongside them. They paid a particular tribute to the Norwegian ski patrols. Norwegians at Lillehammer for seven days held up with rifles only a German force with tanks, armoured cars, bombing aeroplanes and all the paraphernalia of modern war". [ 24 ] He concluded his speech by calling for Parliament to "speak out (and say) we must have done with half-measures (to promote) a policy for the more vigorous conduct of the war". [ 24 ] No longer an ordinary debate [ edit ] The rest of the first day's debate saw speeches both supporting and criticising the Chamberlain government. Sinclair was followed by two ex-soldiers, Brigadier Henry Page Croft for the Conservatives, and Colonel Josiah Wedgwood for Labour. Derided by Labour, [ 25 ] Croft made an unconvincing case in support of Chamberlain, and described the press as "the biggest dictator of all". [ 26 ] Wedgwood denounced Croft for his "facile optimism, that saps the morale of the whole country". [ 27 ] Wedgwood warned of the dangers inherent in trying to negotiate with Hitler, and urged prosecution of the war by "a government which can take this war seriously". [ 28 ] [ 25 ] Attending the debate was National Labour MP Harold Nicolson who was arguably the pre-eminent diarist of British politics in the twentieth century. [ 29 ] He took special notice of a comment made by Wedgwood which, in Nicolson's view, transformed "an ordinary debate (into) a tremendous conflict of wills". [ 25 ] Wedgwood had asked if the government was preparing any plan to prevent an invasion of Great Britain. A Conservative MP, Vice Admiral Ernest Taylor , interrupted and asked him if he had forgotten the Royal Navy. Wedgwood countered that with: [ 25 ] [ 30 ] The British Navy could perfectly well defend this country if it had not gone to the other end of the Mediterranean to keep itself safe from bombing. Moments later, Admiral of the Fleet Sir Roger Keyes , the Conservative Member for Portsmouth North , arrived in the chamber and caused a stir because he was resplendent in his uniform with gold braid and six rows of medal ribbons. He squeezed into a bench just behind Nicolson who passed him a piece of paper with Wedgwood's remark scribbled on it. Keyes went to the Speaker and asked to be called next as the honour of the navy was at stake, though he had really come to the House with the intention of criticising the Chamberlain government. [ 31 ] Keyes: "I speak for the fighting Navy" [ edit ] When Wedgwood sat down, the Speaker called Keyes, who began by denouncing Wedgwood's comment as "a damned insult". [ 32 ] The House, especially David Lloyd George , "roared its applause". [ 32 ] Keyes quickly moved on, and became the debate's first Tory rebel. As Jenkins puts it, Keyes "turned his guns on Chamberlain" but with the proviso that he was longing to see "proper use made of Churchill's great abilities". [ 33 ] Sketch of Keyes by Glyn Warren Philpot , 1918. Imperial War Museum Keyes was a hero of the First World War representing a naval town, and an Admiral of the Fleet (though no longer on the active list ). He spoke mostly on the conduct of naval operations, particularly the abortive operations to retake Trondheim . Keyes told the House: [ 34 ] I came to the House of Commons to-day in uniform for the first time because I wish to speak for some officers and men of the fighting, sea-going Navy who are very unhappy. I want to make it perfectly clear that it is not their fault that the German warships and transports which forced their way into Norwegian ports by treachery were not followed in and destroyed as they were at Narvik. It is not the fault of those for whom I speak that the enemy have been left in undisputable possession of vulnerable ports and aerodromes for nearly a month, have been given time to pour in reinforcements by sea and air, to land tanks, heavy artillery and mechanised transport, and have been given time to develop the air offensive which has had such a devastating effect on the morale of Whitehall. If they had been more courageously and offensively employed they might have done much to prevent these unhappy happenings and much to influence unfriendly neutrals. As the House listened in silence, Keyes finished by quoting Horatio Nelson 's evocation of Livy : [ 35 ] There are hundreds of young officers who are waiting eagerly to seize Warburton-Lee 's torch, or emulate the deeds of Vian of the " Cossack ". One hundred and forty years ago, Nelson said, "I am of the opinion that the boldest measures are the safest" and that still holds good to-day. It was 19:30 when Keyes sat down to "thunderous applause". Nicolson wrote that Keyes's speech was the most dramatic he had ever heard, [ 36 ] and the debate from that point on was no longer an investigation of the Norwegian campaign but "a criticism of the government's whole