Criticism of Marxism - Wikipedia Jump to content From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Karl Marx and the Close of His System is a book published in 1896 by the Austrian economist Eugen von Bohm-Bawerk , which represented one of the earliest detailed critiques of Marxism. Criticism of Marxism has come from various political ideologies , campaigns and academic disciplines . This includes general intellectual criticism about dogmatism , a lack of internal consistency , criticism related to materialism (both philosophical and historical ), arguments that Marxism is a type of historical determinism or that it necessitates a suppression of individual rights , issues with the implementation of communism and economic issues such as the distortion or absence of price signals and reduced incentives . In addition, critics have raised empirical and epistemological concerns, arguing that Marxism relies on vague or unfalsifiable theories, resists refutation through dialectical reinterpretation , and has failed key predictions about capitalist collapse and socialist revolution. [ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] General criticism [ edit ] Part of a series on Marxism Outline Concepts Philosophy Alienation Dialectical materialism Ethics Historical materialism Ideology Praxis Reification Economic analysis Labour theory of value Law of value Value-form Abstract and concrete labour Socially necessary labour time Use value Exchange value Means of production Mode of production Capitalist Socialist Productive forces Relations of production Commodity ( fetishism ) Surplus product Surplus value Exploitation Wage labour Capital ( accumulation ) Critique of political economy Crisis theory Imperialism Reserve army of labour Tendency of the rate of profit to fall Social and political theory Class Bourgeoisie Proletariat Working class Lumpenproletariat Class consciousness False consciousness Classless society State theory State capitalism Withering away of the state Democracy Democratic centralism Dictatorship of the proletariat Radical democracy Soviet democracy Base and superstructure Communist society Cultural hegemony Human nature Immiseration Metabolic rift Private property Social reproduction Theory of history Class struggle Primitive accumulation Proletarian revolution World revolution Schools of thought Foundational Classical Marxism Orthodox Marxism Revisionist Marxism Primary branches Bukharinism Deng Xiaoping Theory Left communism Leninism Marxism–Leninism Maoism Titoism Trotskyism Western Marxism Frankfurt School Humanist Praxis School Structural Libertarian Marxism Autonomism Communization Operaismo Situationism Academic and post- 1968 schools Analytical Budapest School Dependency theory Ecological Feminist Neo- Open New Marx Reading Political Post- Regulation school Subaltern Studies Value-criticism World-systems theory Other tendencies Austrian Centrist Marxism Black radical tradition De Leonism Eurocommunism Liberal Nkrumaism Fields of study Aesthetics Archaeology Anthropology Criminology Cultural analysis Cultural studies Film theory Geography Historiography International relations Literary criticism Mathematics Religion Sociology Theoretical works Foundational texts Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844 Theses on Feuerbach The German Ideology The Poverty of Philosophy Wage Labour and Capital The Communist Manifesto The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte Grundrisse A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy Value, Price and Profit Das Kapital The Civil War in France Critique of the Gotha Programme Anti-Dühring The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy Early 20th century What Is to Be Done? The Accumulation of Capital Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism Terrorism and Communism The State and Revolution Essays on Marx's Theory of Value History and Class Consciousness Prison Notebooks The Black Jacobins Mid-20th century and the New Left On Practice Dialectic of Enlightenment Labor and Monopoly Capital Monopoly Capital The Wretched of the Earth Reading Capital The Society of the Spectacle Pedagogy of the Oppressed Ideology and Ideological State Apparatuses How Europe Underdeveloped Africa Anti-Oedipus Social Justice and the City Discipline and Punish Late 20th and 21st century Women, Race and Class Marxism and the Oppression of Women Imagined Communities Hegemony and Socialist Strategy The Sublime Object of Ideology Gender Trouble Time, Labor and Social Domination The Age of Extremes The Origin of Capitalism Marx's Ecology Empire Caliban and the Witch Capitalist Realism Capital in the Anthropocene People Classical Marx Engels Orthodox Bernstein Bukharin Connolly Kautsky Kollontai Lafargue Lenin Liebknecht Luxemburg Morris Plekhanov Trotsky Zetkin Marxist-Leninists Bettelheim Davis Ghandy Haywood Parenti Roy Trường Western Marxists Adorno Althusser Benjamin Bloch Gramsci Habermas Horkheimer Korsch Lefebvre Lukács Marcuse Poulantzas Sartre Austromarxists Adler Bauer Hilferding Left communists Bordiga Damen Gorter Mattick Pannekoek Economists Braverman Grossman Kalecki Mandel Marini Rubin Sweezy Uno Wolff Historians Anderson Deutscher Hobsbawm Losurdo Thompson Wood Revolutionary leaders Castro Guevara Hampton Ho Kim Malaka Mao Newton Sankara Stalin Zachariadis Anti-colonial and postcolonial theorists Amin Cabral Davis Du Bois Fanon James Jones Mariátegui Mohanty Nkrumah Rodney Spivak Later 20th and 21st century Badiou Balibar Baudrillard Bensaïd Butler Cohen Dauvé Debord Deleuze and Guattari Derrida Eagleton Federici Foster Foucault Fraser Hall Harvey Heinrich Jameson Laclau and Mouffe Löwy Miliband Negri Postone Rancière Saito Tronti Vogel Wallerstein Williams Wright Žižek Journals Antipode Capital Class Capitalism Nature Socialism Critique: Journal of Socialist Theory Historical Materialism Mediations Monthly Review New Left Review Race Class Rethinking Marxism Science Society Socialist Register Related topics Critiques Criticism of Marxism Concepts Conflict theory Economic determinism Historical determinism Economism Intercommunalism Postcolonialism Scientific socialism Vanguardism Vulgar Marxism Movements Communism ( History ) Left-wing politics New Old Ultra Municipalism Socialism Authoritarian Democratic Eco- Market Reformist Revolutionary Social democracy Utopian Practices Collectivization Nationalization Planned economy Worker cooperative Workers' council Communism portal Socialism portal Politics portal v t e See also: Reformism Some democratic socialists and social democrats reject the idea that societies can achieve socialism only through class conflict and a proletarian revolution . Many anarchists reject the need for a transitory state phase . Some thinkers have rejected the fundamentals of Marxist theory, such as historical materialism and the labor theory of value and have gone on to criticize capitalism and advocate socialism using other arguments. Some contemporary supporters of Marxism see many aspects of Marxist thought as viable, but contend that the corpus is incomplete or outdated in regard to certain aspects of economic, political or social theory. They may therefore combine Marxist concepts with the ideas of other theorists such as Max Weber —the Frankfurt School provides one example of this approach. Conservative historian Paul Johnson in his 1988 book Intellectuals wrote that Marx "developed traits characteristic of a certain type of scholar, especially Talmudic ones: a tendency to accumulate immense masses of half-assimilated materials and to plan encyclopaedic works which were never completed; a withering contempt for all non-scholars; and extreme assertiveness and irascibility in dealing with other scholars. Virtually all his work, indeed, has the hallmark of Talmudic study: it is essentially a commentary on, a critique of the work of others in his field." He continues: "The truth is, even the most superficial inquiry into Marx's use of evidence forces one to treat with skepticism everything he wrote which relies on factual data". For example, Johnson stated: "The whole of the key Chapter Eight of Capital is a deliberate and systematic falsification to prove a thesis which an objective examination of the facts showed was untenable". [ 5 ] [ page needed ] Paul Johnson's criticism of Marx has itself been subject to criticism by Marxian economist Richard D. Wolff . In a 1991 academic paper, Wolff describes Johnson's book as "Criticism as malicious gossip [...] a right-wing tirade of rage is vented against left-wing social critics, intellectuals in general, Jews, women, and most of the others who compose the usual targets of such mentalities." [ 6 ] Historical materialism [ edit ] Historical materialism remains one of the bases of Marxism . [ 7 ] [ 8 ] It proposes that technological advances in modes of production inevitably lead to changes in the social relations of production. [ 9 ] This economic " base " of society supports, is reflected by and influences the ideological " superstructure " which encompasses culture, religion, politics, and all other aspects of humanity's social consciousness. [ 10 ] It thus looks for the causes of developments and changes in human history in economic, technological and, more broadly, material factors as well as the clashes of material interests among tribes, social classes, and nations. Law, politics, the arts, literature, morality and religion are understood by Marx to make up the superstructure as reflections of the economic base of society. Many critics [ who? ] have argued that this is an oversimplification of the nature of society and claim that the influence of ideas, culture and other aspects of what Marx called the superstructure are just as important as the economic base to the course of society, if not more so. However, Marxism does not claim that the economic base of society is the only determining element in society as demonstrated by the following letter written by Friedrich Engels , Marx's long-time contributor: According to the materialist conception of history, the ultimately determining element in history is the production and reproduction of real life. More than this neither Marx nor I ever asserted. Hence if somebody twists this into saying that the economic element is the only determining one he transforms that proposition into a meaningless, abstract, senseless phrase. [ 11 ] According to critics, this also creates another problem for Marxism. If the superstructure also influences the base then there is no need for Marx's constant assertions that the history of society is one of economic class conflict. This then becomes a classic chicken or the egg argument as to whether the base or the superstructure comes first. Peter Singer proposes that the way to solve this problem is to understand that Marx saw the economic base as ultimately real. Marx believed that humanity's defining characteristic was its means of production and thus the only way for man to free himself from oppression was for him to take control of the means of production. According to Marx, this is the goal of history and the elements of the superstructure act as tools of history. [ 12 ] Marx held that the relationship between material base and ideological superstructure was a determination relation and not a causal relation. [ 13 ] However, some critics of Marx have insisted that Marx claimed the superstructure was an effect caused by the base. For instance, Anarcho-capitalist Murray Rothbard criticized historical materialism by arguing that Marx claimed the "base" of society (its technology and social relations) determined its "consciousness" in the superstructure. [ 14 ] Historical determinism [ edit ] Marx's theory of history has been considered a variant of historical determinism [ 15 ] linked to his reliance on dialectical materialism as an endogenous mechanism for social change. [ 16 ] Marx wrote: At a certain stage of development, the material productive forces of society come into conflict with the existing relations of production or – this merely expresses the same thing in legal terms – with the property relations within the framework of which they have operated hitherto. From forms of development of the productive forces these relations turn into their fetters. Then begins an era of social revolution. The changes in the economic foundation lead sooner or later to the transformation of the whole immense superstructure. [ 17 ] The concept of the dialectic first emerged from the dialogues of the ancient Greek philosophers , but it was revived by Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel in the early 19th century as a conceptual framework for describing the often-opposing forces of historical evolution. Historical determinism has also been associated with scholars like Arnold Toynbee and Oswald Spengler , but in recent times this conceptual approach has fallen into disuse. [ 18 ] Terry Eagleton writes that Marx's writings "should not be taken to mean that everything that has ever happened is a matter of class struggle. It means, rather, that class struggle is most fundamental to human history". [ 19 ] Academic Peter Stillman believes Marx's status as a determinist is a "myth". [ 20 ] Friedrich Engels himself cautioned against interpreting Marxism as strictly deterministic, emphasizing that while economic factors are foundational, they are not the sole forces shaping history. [ 21 ] On another occasion, Engels remarked that "younger people sometimes lay more stress on the economic side than is due to it". [ 22 ] In an effort to reassert this approach to an understanding of the forces of history, Prabhat Ranjan Sarkar criticised what he considered the narrow conceptual basis of Marx's ideas on historical evolution. [ 23 ] In the 1978 book The Downfall of Capitalism and Communism , Ravi Batra pointed out crucial differences in the historical determinist approaches of Sarkar and Marx: Sarkar's main concern with the human element is what imparts universality to his thesis. Thus while social evolution according to Marx is governed chiefly by economic conditions, to Sarkar this dynamic is propelled by forces varying with time and space: sometimes physical prowess and high-spiritedness, sometimes intellect applied to dogmas and sometimes intellect applied to the accumulation of capital (p. 38). [...] The main line of defence of the Sarkarian hypothesis is that unlike the dogmas now in disrepute, it does not emphasise one particular point to the exclusion of all others: it is based on the sum total of human experience – the totality of human nature. Whenever a single factor, however important and fundamental, is called upon to illuminate the entire past and by implication the future, it simply invites disbelief, and after closer inspection, rejection. Marx committed that folly, and to some extent so did Toynbee. They both offered an easy prey to the critics, and the result is that today historical determinism is regarded by most scholars as an idea so bankrupt that it can never be solvent again. [ 24 ] Suppression of individual rights [ edit ] Various thinkers have argued that a communist state would by its very nature erode the rights of its citizens due to the postulated violent revolution and dictatorship of proletariat , its collectivist nature, reliance on "the masses" rather than individuals, historical materialism and centrally planned economy . [ citation needed ] These points have also been debated by various thinkers, who argue that we currently exist in a Dictatorship of the Bourgeoisie [ 25 ] and that Marxism is not deterministic. [ 26 ] The American neoclassical economist Milton Friedman argued that the absence of a free market economy under socialism would inevitably lead to an authoritarian political regime. Friedman's view was shared by Friedrich Hayek , who also believed that capitalism is a precondition for freedom to flourish in a nation state. [ 27 ] [ 28 ] David Harvey has responded to such claims by suggesting that socialism enables individual freedom, stating that "the achievement of individual liberties and freedoms is, I argued, a central aim of such emancipatory projects. But that achievement requires collectively building a society where each one of us has adequate life chances and life possibilities to realize each one of our own potentialities." [ 29 ] In contrast, Jonathan Chait writes that "Marxist governments trample on individual rights because Marxist theory does not care about individual rights. Marxism is a theory of class justice... Unlike liberalism, which sees rights as a positive-sum good that can expand or contract for society as a whole, Marxists (and other left-wing critics of liberalism) think of political rights as a zero-sum conflict. Either they are exercised on behalf of oppression or against it." [ 30 ] Anarchists have also argued that centralized communism would inevitably create coercion and state domination. Mikhail Bakunin believed Marxist regimes would lead to the "despotic control of the populace by a new and not at all numerous aristocracy". [ 31 ] Even if this new aristocracy were to have originated from among the ranks of the proletariat , Bakunin argued that their new-found power would fundamentally change their view of society and thus lead them to "look down at the plain working masses". [ 31 ] Economic [ edit ] Marxian economics have been criticized for a number of reasons. Some critics point to the Marxian analysis of capitalism while others argue that the economic system proposed by Marxism is unworkable. [ 32 ] [ 33 ] [ 34 ] [ 35 ] There are also doubts that the rate of profit in capitalism would tend to fall as Marx predicted. In 1961, Marxian economist Nobuo Okishio devised a theorem ( Okishio's theorem ) showing that if capitalists pursue cost-cutting techniques and if the real wage does not rise, the rate of profit must rise. [ 36 ] Labor theory of value [ edit ] Main article: Labor theory of value The labor theory of value is one of the most commonly criticized core tenets of Marxism. [ 37 ] [ 38 ] [ 39 ] [ 40 ] [ 41 ] The Austrian School argues that this fundamental theory of classical economics is false and prefers the subsequent and modern subjective theory of value put forward by Carl Menger in his book Principles of Economics . The Austrian School was not alone in criticizing the Marxian and classical belief in the labor theory of value. British economist Alfred Marshall attacked Marx, saying: "It is not true that the spinning of yarn in a factory [...] is the product of the labour of the operatives. It is the product of their labour, together with that of the employer and subordinate managers, and of the capital employed". [ 42 ] Marshall points to the capitalist as sacrificing the money he could be using now for investment in business, which ultimately produces work. [ 42 ] By this logic, the capitalist contributes to the work and productivity of the factory because he delays his gratification through investment. [ 42 ] Through the law of supply and demand , Marshall attacked Marxian theory of value. According to Marshall, price or value is determined not just by supply, but by the demand of the consumer. [ 42 ] Labor does contribute to cost, but so do the wants and needs of consumers. The shift from labor being the source of all value to subjective individual evaluations creating all value undermines Marx's economic conclusions and some of his social theories. [ 43 ] Shimshon Bichler and Jonathan Nitzan argue that most studies purporting to show empirical evidence of the labor theory of value often make methodological errors by comparing the total labor value to total price of multiple economic sectors, which results in a strong overall correlation but this is a statistical exaggeration; the authors argue that the correlations between labor value and price in each sector are often very small if not insignificant. Bichler and Nitzan al