Philosophiæ Naturalis Principia Mathematica - Wikipedia Jump to content From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1687 work by Isaac Newton For Whitehead and Russell's work, see Principia Mathematica . "},"image":{"wt":"Newton s Principia title page.png"},"caption":{"wt":"Title page of Principia , first edition (1687)"},"author":{"wt":"[[Isaac Newton]]"},"country":{"wt":"England"},"language":{"wt":"[[Neo-Latin]]"},"pub_date":{"wt":"1687"},"english_pub_date":{"wt":"1728"},"congress":{"wt":"QA803 .A53"},"orig_lang_code":{"wt":"la"},"native_wikisource":{"wt":"Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica"},"wikisource":{"wt":"The Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy"}},"i":0}}]}'> Philosophiæ Naturalis Principia Mathematica Title page of Principia , first edition (1687) Author Isaac Newton Language Neo-Latin Publication date 1687 Publication place England Published in English 1728 Library of Congress Classification /span>"}]]}'>LC Class QA803 .A53 Original text Philosophiæ Naturalis Principia Mathematica at Latin Wikisource Translation Philosophiæ Naturalis Principia Mathematica at Wikisource Philosophiæ Naturalis Principia Mathematica (English: The Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy ), [ 1 ] often called simply the Principia ( / p r ɪ n ˈ s ɪ p i ə , - ˈ k ɪ p -/ ), is a book by Sir Isaac Newton that expounds Newton's laws of motion and his law of universal gravitation . The Principia is written in Latin and comprises three volumes, and was authorized ( imprimatur ) by Samuel Pepys , then-president of the Royal Society on 5 July 1686 and first published in 1687. [ 2 ] [ 3 ] After annotating and correcting his personal copy of the first edition, [ 4 ] Newton published two further editions, one of 1713 [ 5 ] with errors in the 1687 version corrected, and another, improved one [ 6 ] of 1726. [ 5 ] The Principia forms a mathematical foundation for the theory of classical mechanics , and is generally considered to be one of the most important works in the history of science . [ 7 ] It has been referred to as "the greatest scientific work in history" and "the supreme expression in human thought of the mind's ability to hold the universe fixed as an object of contemplation". [ 8 ] Recent research has challenged the long-held view that the Principia had only a limited initial readership, suggesting that its early influence on Enlightenment science was substantially greater than previously recognized. [ 9 ] In formulating his physical laws, Newton developed and used mathematical methods now included in the field of calculus , expressing them in the form of geometric propositions about "vanishingly small" shapes. [ 10 ] In a revised conclusion to the Principia (see § General Scholium ) , Newton emphasized the empirical nature of the work with the expression Hypotheses non fingo ("I frame/feign no hypotheses"). [ 11 ] Among other achievements, Newton provides an explanation for Johannes Kepler 's laws of planetary motion , which Kepler had obtained empirically . Contents [ edit ] Expressed aim and topics covered [ edit ] Portrait of Sir Isaac Newton (1643–1727), author of the Principia , by Godfrey Kneller (1689) The Preface of the work states: [ 12 ] ... Rational Mechanics will be the sciences of motion resulting from any forces whatsoever, and of the forces required to produce any motion, accurately proposed and demonstrated ... And therefore we offer this work as mathematical principles of his philosophy. For all the difficulty of philosophy seems to consist in this—from the phenomena of motions to investigate the forces of Nature, and then from these forces to demonstrate the other phenomena ... Newton situates himself within the contemporary scientific movement which had "omit[ed] substantial forms and the occult qualities" and instead endeavoured to explain the world by empirical investigation and outlining of empirical regularities. [ 13 ] The Principia deals primarily with massive bodies in motion, initially under a variety of conditions and hypothetical laws of force in both non-resisting and resisting media, thus offering criteria to decide, by observations, which laws of force are operating in phenomena that may be observed. It attempts to cover hypothetical or possible motions both of celestial bodies and of terrestrial projectiles. It explores difficult problems of motions perturbed by multiple attractive forces. Its third and final book deals with the interpretation of observations about the movements of planets and their satellites. The book: shows how astronomical observations verify the inverse square law of gravitation (to an accuracy that was high by the standards of Newton's time); offers estimates of relative masses for the known giant planets and for the Earth and the Sun; defines the motion of the Sun relative to the Solar System barycenter ; shows how the theory of gravity can account for irregularities in the motion of the Moon ; identifies the oblateness of the shape of the Earth; accounts approximately for marine tides including phenomena of spring and neap tides by the perturbing (and varying) gravitational attractions of the Sun and Moon on the Earth's waters; explains the precession of the equinoxes as an effect of the gravitational attraction of the Moon on the Earth's equatorial bulge; and gives theoretical basis for numerous phenomena about comets and their elongated, near-parabolic orbits. The opening sections of the Principia contain, in revised and extended form, nearly [ 14 ] all of the content of Newton's 1684 tract De motu corporum in gyrum . The Principia begin with "Definitions" [ 15 ] and "Axioms or Laws of Motion", [ 16 ] and continues in three books: Book 1, De motu corporum [ edit ] Book 1, subtitled De motu corporum ( On the motion of bodies ) concerns motion in the absence of any resisting medium. It opens with a collection of mathematical lemmas on "the method of first and last ratios", [ 17 ] a geometrical form of infinitesimal calculus. [ 10 ] Newton's proof of Kepler's second law, as described in the book. If a continuous centripetal force (red arrow) is considered on the planet during its orbit, the area of the triangles defined by the path of the planet will be the same. This is true for any fixed time interval. When the interval tends to zero, the force can be considered instantaneous. (Click image for a detailed description). The second section establishes relationships between centripetal forces and the law of areas now known as Kepler's second law (Propositions 1–3), [ 18 ] and relates circular velocity and radius of path-curvature to radial force [ 19 ] (Proposition 4), and relationships between centripetal forces varying as the inverse-square of the distance to the center and orbits of conic-section form (Propositions 5–10). Propositions 11–31 [ 20 ] establish properties of motion in paths of eccentric conic-section form including ellipses, and their relationship with inverse-square central forces directed to a focus and include Newton's theorem about ovals (lemma 28). Propositions 43–45 [ 21 ] are demonstration that in an eccentric orbit under centripetal force where the apse may move, a steady non-moving orientation of the line of apses is an indicator of an inverse-square law of force. Book 1 contains some proofs with little connection to real-world dynamics. But there are also sections with far-reaching application to the solar system and universe: Propositions 57–69 [ 22 ] deal with the "motion of bodies drawn to one another by centripetal forces". This section is of primary interest for its application to the Solar System , and includes Proposition 66 [ 23 ] along with its 22 corollaries: [ 24 ] here Newton took the first steps in the definition and study of the problem of the movements of three massive bodies subject to their mutually perturbing gravitational attractions, a problem which later gained name and fame (among other reasons, for its great difficulty) as the three-body problem . Propositions 70–84 [ 25 ] deal with the attractive forces of spherical bodies. The section contains Newton's proof that a massive spherically symmetrical body attracts other bodies outside itself as if all its mass were concentrated at its centre. This fundamental result, called the Shell theorem , enables the inverse square law of gravitation to be applied to the real solar system to a very close degree of approximation. Book 2, part 2 of De motu corporum [ edit ] Part of the contents originally planned for the first book was divided out into a second book, which largely concerns motion through resisting mediums. Just as Newton examined consequences of different conceivable laws of attraction in Book 1, here he examines different conceivable laws of resistance; thus Section 1 discusses resistance in direct proportion to velocity, and Section 2 goes on to examine the implications of resistance in proportion to the square of velocity. Through Book II, Newton was an important pioneer of fluid mechanics , and a later analysis showed that of its 53 propositions almost all are correct, with only two or three open to question. [ 26 ] Book 2 discusses (in Section 5 ) hydrostatics and the properties of compressible fluids; he also derives Boyle's law (incorrectly; for an ideal gas is not like an elastic fluid). [ 27 ] The effects of air resistance on pendulums are studied in Section 6 , along with Newton's account of experiments that he carried out, to try to find out some characteristics of air resistance in reality by observing the motions of pendulums under different conditions. Newton compares the resistance offered by a medium against motions of globes with different properties (material, weight, size). In Section 8, he derives rules to determine the speed of waves in fluids and relates them to the density and condensation (Proposition 48; [ 28 ] this would become very important in acoustics). He assumes that these rules apply equally to light and sound and estimates that the speed of sound is around 1088 feet per second and can increase depending on the amount of water in air. [ 29 ] Less of Book 2 has stood the test of time than of Books 1 and 3, and it has been said that Book 2 was largely written to refute a theory of Descartes which had some wide acceptance before Newton's work (and for some time after). According to Descartes's theory of vortices, planetary motions were produced by the whirling of fluid vortices that filled interplanetary space and carried the planets along with them. [ 30 ] Newton concluded Book 2 [ 31 ] by commenting that the hypothesis of vortices was completely at odds with the astronomical phenomena, and served not so much to explain as to confuse them. Book 3, De mundi systemate [ edit ] Book 3, subtitled De mundi systemate ( On the system of the world ), is an exposition of many consequences of universal gravitation, especially its consequences for astronomy. It builds upon the propositions of the previous books and applies them with greater specificity than in Book 1 to the motions observed in the Solar System. Here (introduced by Proposition 22, [ 32 ] and continuing in Propositions 25–35 [ 33 ] ) are developed several of the features and irregularities of the orbital motion of the Moon, especially the variation . Newton lists the astronomical observations on which he relies, [ 34 ] and establishes in a stepwise manner that the inverse square law of mutual gravitation applies to Solar System bodies, starting with the satellites of Jupiter [ 35 ] and going on by stages to show that the law is of universal application. [ 36 ] He also gives starting at Lemma 4 [ 37 ] and Proposition 40 [ 38 ] the theory of the motions of comets, for which much data came from John Flamsteed and Edmond Halley , and accounts for the tides, [ 39 ] attempting quantitative estimates of the contributions of the Sun [ 40 ] and Moon [ 41 ] to the tidal motions; and offers the first theory of the precession of the equinoxes . [ 42 ] Book 3 also considers the harmonic oscillator in three dimensions, and motion in arbitrary force laws. In Book 3 Newton also made clear his heliocentric view of the Solar System, modified in a somewhat modern way, since already in the mid-1680s he recognised the "deviation of the Sun" from the centre of gravity of the Solar System. [ 43 ] For Newton, "the common centre of gravity of the Earth, the Sun and all the Planets is to be esteem'd the Centre of the World", [ 44 ] and that this centre "either is at rest, or moves uniformly forward in a right line". [ 45 ] Newton rejected the second alternative after adopting the position that "the centre of the system of the world is immoveable", which "is acknowledg'd by all, while some contend that the Earth, others, that the Sun is fix'd in that centre". [ 45 ] Newton estimated the mass ratios Sun:Jupiter and Sun:Saturn, [ 46 ] and pointed out that these put the centre of the Sun usually a little way off the common center of gravity, but only a little, the distance at most "would scarcely amount to one diameter of the Sun". [ 47 ] Commentary on the Principia [ edit ] This section needs more citations . Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed . Find sources: "Philosophiæ Naturalis Principia Mathematica" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( July 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The sequence of definitions used in setting up dynamics in the Principia is recognisable in many textbooks today. Newton first set out the definition of mass The quantity of matter is that which arises conjointly from its density and magnitude. A body twice as dense in double the space is quadruple in quantity. This quantity I designate by the name of body or of mass. This was then used to define the "quantity of motion" (today called momentum ), and the principle of inertia in which mass replaces the previous Cartesian notion of intrinsic force . This then set the stage for the introduction of forces through the change in momentum of a body. Curiously, for today's readers, the exposition looks dimensionally incorrect, since Newton does not introduce the dimension of time in rates of changes of quantities. He defined space and time "not as they are well known to all". Instead, he defined "true" time and space as "absolute" [ 48 ] and explained: Only I must observe, that the vulgar conceive those quantities under no other notions but from the relation they bear to perceptible objects. And it will be convenient to distinguish them into absolute and relative, true and apparent, mathematical and common. ... instead of absolute places and motions, we use relative ones; and that without any inconvenience in common affairs; but in philosophical discussions, we ought to step back from our senses, and consider things themselves, distinct from what are only perceptible measures of them. To some modern readers it can appear that some dynamical quantities recognised today were used in the Principia but not named. The mathematical aspects of the first two books were so clearly consistent that they were easily accepted; for example, John Locke asked Christiaan Huygens whether he could trust the mathematical proofs and was assured about their correctness. However, the concept of an attractive force acting at a distance received a cooler response. In his notes, Newton wrote that the inverse square law arose naturally due to the structure of matter. However, he retracted this sentence in the published version, where he stated that the motion of planets is consistent with an inverse square law, but refused to speculate on the origin of the law. Huygens and Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz noted that the law was incompatible with the notion of the aether . From a Cartesian point of view, therefore, this was a faulty theory. Newton's defence has been adopted since by many famous physicists—he pointed out that the mathematical form of the theory had to be correct since it explained the data, and he refused to speculate further on the basic nature of gravity. The sheer number of phenomena that could be organised by the theory was so impressive that younger "philosophers" soon adopted the methods and language of the Principia . Rules of Reason [ edit ] Perhaps to reduce the risk of public misunderstanding, Newton included at the beginning of Book 3 (in the second (1713) and third (1726) editions) a section titled "Rules of Reasoning in Philosophy". In the four rules, as they came finally to stand in the 1726 edition, Newton effectively offers a methodology for handling unknown phenomena in nature and reaching towards explanations for them. These rules have become the basis of the modern approaches to science. [ 49 ] The four Rules of the 1726 edition run as follows (omitting some explanatory comments that follow each): We are to admit no more causes of natural things than such as are both true and sufficient to explain their appearances. Therefore to the same natural effects we must, as far as possible, assign the same causes. The qualities of bodies, which admit neither intensification nor remission of degrees, and which are found to belong to all bodies within the reach of our experiments, are to be esteemed the universal qualities of all bodies whatsoever. In experimental philosophy we are to look upon propositions inferred by general induction from phenomena as accurately or very nearly true, not withstanding any contrary hypothesis that may be imagined, till such time as other phenomena occur, by which they may either be made more accurate, or liable to exceptions. This section of Rules for philosophy is followed by a listing of "Phenomena", in which are listed a number of mainly astronomical observations, that Newton used as the basis for inferences later on, as if adopting a consensus set of facts from the astronomers of his time. Both the "Rules" and the "Phenomena" evolved from one edition of the Principia to the next. Rule 4 made its appearance in the third (1726) edition; Rules 1–3 were present as "Rules" in the second (1713) edition, and predecessors of them were also present in the first edition of 1687, but there they had a different heading: they were not given as "Rules", but rather in the first (1687) edition the predecessors of the three later "Rules", and of most of the later "Phenomena", were all lumped together under a single heading "Hypotheses" (in which the third item was the predecessor of a heavy revision that gave the later Rule 3). From this textual evolution, it appears that Newton wanted by the later headings "Rules" and "Phenomena" to clarify for his readers his view of the roles to be played by these various statements. In the third (1726) edition of the Principia , Newton explains each rule in an alternative way and/or gives an example to back up what the rule is claiming. The first rule is explained as a philosophers' principle of economy. The second rule states that if one cause is assigned to a natural effect, then the same cause so far as possible must be assigned to natural effects of the same kind: for example, respiration in humans and in animals, fires in the home and in the Sun, or the reflection of light whether it occurs terrestrially or from the planets. An extensive explanation is given of the third rule, concerning the qualities of bodies, and Newton discusses here the generalisation of observational results, with a caution against making up fancies contrary to experiments, and use of the rules to illustrate the observation of gravity and space. General Scholium [ edit ] Main article: General Scholium The General Scholium is a concluding essay added to the second edition, 1713 (and amended in the third edition, 1726). [ 50 ] It is not to be confused with the General Scholium at the end of Book 2, Section 6, which discusses his pendulum experiments and resistance due to air, water, and other