The Studios of Key West - Wikipedia Jump to content Coordinates : 24°33′28″N 81°48′9″W ﻿ / ﻿ 24.55778°N 81.80250°W ﻿ / 24.55778; -81.80250 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Arts center The Studios' home: the former Scottish Rite Masonic Center at Simonton and Eaton Streets TSKW Cuba Show The Studios of Key West is a center for the arts in Key West , an island community at the southernmost tip of the Florida Keys . Established in 2006 as a nonprofit cultural organization, The Studios works to promote multidisciplinary arts, to provide artist-in-residency opportunities for artists worldwide, and to maintain long-term studio spaces dedicated to Florida Keys
artists. [ 1 ] [ 2 ] The organization publishes a yearly catalog of activities . Campus [ edit ] Eaton Street Facility [ edit ] The Studios of Key West, located at 533 Eaton Street, is in the heart of downtown Key West. The three-story building, a piece of Miami Deco architecture, was built in 1951 at the corner of Simonton and Eaton, and is the former Scottish Rite Masonic Center. [ 3 ] After a total renovation, the building now includes Key West's largest exhibition space dedicated to contemporary art, a full bar, a box office/information center, a 200-seat auditorium, nine artists' studios, and two classrooms (Filosa). In 2019 Hugh's View, a rooftop terrace, was added to serve as The Studios’ creative space in the sky. In 2016 Books Books @ The Studios opened offering over 2,500 titles in a variety of subjects and continues to sponsor author talks, book signings, and other events. The Carriage Trade Artist House [ edit ] Part of a series on the History of Key West List African Cemetery at Higgs Beach USS Amesbury Key West Aquarium The Armory (Key West) Audubon House and Tropical Gardens Captain Tony's Saloon Key West Cemetery U.S. Coast Guard Headquarters, Key West Station Ernest Hemingway House Fogarty Mansion (Fogarty House) Eduardo H. Gato House Key West Heritage House Museum and Robert Frost Cottage Key West Historic District Key West Bight Key West Lighthouse Mallory Square Martello Gallery-Key West Art and Historical Museum U.S. Naval Station (Key West, Florida) Pan Am Dr. Joseph Y. Porter House Old Post Office and Customshouse (Key West, Florida) Sloppy Joe's Southernmost House Thompson Fish House, Turtle Cannery and Kraals Truman Annex Harry S. Truman Little White House Veterans of Foreign Wars Walter R. Mickens Post 6021 and William Weech American Legion Post 168 West Martello Tower Fort Zachary Taylor Historic homes Eduardo H. Gato House Fogarty Mansion (Fogarty House) Dr. Joseph Y. Porter House Key West Heritage House Museum and Robert Frost Cottage Southernmost House Notes that a majority of this list contains sites that have been added to the U.S. National Register of Historic Places or as a U.S. National Historic Landmark People Founders John W. Simonton Pardon Greene John Fleeming John Mountain Other Ernest Hemingway Tennessee Williams Elizabeth Bishop Robert Frost Shel Silverstein Winslow Homer Jimmy Buffett Jerry Jeff Walker Kris Kristofferson John Geddes (politician) Wilhelmina Harvey - Former mayor Charles “Sonny” McCoy – Former mayor Craig Cates – Former mayor Teri Johnston Harry S. Truman David Porter Matthew C. Perry Carl Tanzler – Former U.S. Navy radiologist William Hackley – 19th-century naval surgeon and diarist Conch (people) Henry Flagler Indigenous people of the Everglades region José Martí Vicente Martinez Ybor Mel Fisher Topics Sinking of the Nuestra Señora de Atocha Key West Street Car Company The Great Fire of Key West (1886) Isaac Allerton (shipwreck) Overseas Railroad Overseas Highway Wrecking in the Florida Keys 1935 Labor Day hurricane Cubana de Aviación Flight 493 Key West Agreement Mariel boatlift Conch Republic Hurricane Wilma Timeline Pre-history, until 1513 Spanish Rule , 1513–1763 British Rule , 1763–1783: American Revolutionary War , 1775–1783 Spanish Rule, 1783–1821: War of 1812 , 1811–1814 U.S. Territorial Period , 1822–1845: Florida Wrecking Act, 1823 Federal Wrecking Act, 1825 Statehood , 1845–present: Fort Zachary Taylor , 1845 Ordinance of Secession , 1861 Civil War , 1861–1865 East Gulf Blockade Squadron , 1861 States Florida portal v t e Adjacent to the Eaton Street space, artist accommodations continue to anchor the Peyton Evans Artists In Residence Program at the Carriage Trade Artist House. The Studios of Key West launched a residency program in 2007. In 2019 The Studios acquired the historic guesthouse featuring a spacious courtyard and treehouse adjacent to the Eaton Street facility to be the home for Artists in Residence. The residency program hosts established and emerging artists and cultural figures from all over the world. Chez Margaret Creative Annex [ edit ] As of 2020 and thanks to Blake Hunter and Murphy Davis, The Studios has a new space for housing world-class artists and performers when they come to town. The artist house on Margaret Street also serves as an occasional event space. Programs [ edit ] Peyton Evans Artists In Residency program [ edit ] From hundreds of applications per year, up to 40 artists working in the literary, visual, and performing arts are selected by jury to spend a month drawing inspiration from the colorful sights, fascinating people, and remarkable culture of the island. [ 4 ] Collaborations have included residencies for Art Students League of New York artist/instructors. Recent PEAR artists have included Esterio Segura—painter, sculpture, installation artist from Cuba; Honor Petrie—visual artist from Inverness, Scotland; Halim Flowers—social justice entrepreneur, writer, speaker from Washington DC; Carmen Sanders—wood carver, from Tucker GA; Orlando Garcia—composer of contemporary classical music from Miami Beach FL. And many others. Exhibitions [ edit ] The Studios of Key West hosts upwards of 40 exhibitions and installations each year. Proposals for exhibitions from local and visiting artists and are installed for two-week to one-month periods. The first Thursday of the month brings a recurring Key West event known as First Thursday. The Studios of Key West and other businesses and galleries in the neighborhood opens their doors for a festive gallery walk and multi-site creative adventure. The Studios of Key West presents its exhibition(s) of the month in the first-floor Sanger Gallery and adjacent Zabar Project Gallery, the second-floor Zabar Lobby Gallery, and the third-floor XOJ Gallery. Also open for First Thursday are The Studios of Key West artists' studios on the third floor. Recent exhibitions have included the work of Letty Nowak, Scott Ponemone, Katlin Spain, Robert Aiosa. And many more. Workshops and classes [ edit ] Each year between October and July, The Studios of Key West offers weekly classes, workshops, and longer-term courses that cater to island residents and visitors. The Studios' largest program serves over 1,000 people each season, with more than 50 distinct classes in a range of media for artists from beginners to professionals. Instructors include year-round local artists and artists visiting from across the globe, either to live at The Studios of Key West for a month as Artists-in-Residence or just to teach what they know. Notable among the list are painters such as Lothar Speer, Mike Rooney, Priscilla Coote, Lucy Stevens, Susan Sugar, and many more. The list also includes noted writers, musicians, photographers, jewelry makers, etc. Concerts [ edit ] The Studios of Key West also hosts a contemporary singer-songwriter series. Past performances have included Peter Mayer, Emily Saliers , Livingston Taylor , Noel Paul Stookey , Carrie Newcomer , and Ben Harrison. By popular demand, some artists make yearly appearances, like singer-songwriters Zoe Lewis and Susan Werner . Each year The Studios of Key West presents classical and chamber music concerts with esteemed musicians from around the world. Performances [ edit ] Performance at The Studios of Key West includes dance, performance art, small-scale theatrical productions, and burlesque and circus arts. Highlights have included the following: Tonya Pinkins ( Jelly’s Last Jam , Tony award) presented a workshop reading of her new play with a cast from New York, Charlottesville, and Key West; Tony Shalhoub , Marisa Tomei , Alyssa Milano , Joy Behar , Judith Light, Michael R. Jackson , and many others participated in Between Two Palms, a series of 44 one-hour streaming conversations with artists; Michael Urie ( Ugly Betty ), Ann Harada ( Avenue Q original cast), Constance Shulman ( Orange is the New Black ), and Colby Lewis performed in Smithtown , a streaming play reviewed by the New York Times and The New Yorker ; Blake Hunter (writer/producer, Who’s the Boss, WKRP in Cincinnati) wrote and staged a full-length musical; Mark Campbell (Pulitzer Award, Stonewall) co-presented an evening of original American opera shorts; Norbert Leo Butz (2-time Tony winner, Bloodline , Dirty Rotten Scoundrels , Catch Me If You Can ) performed a benefit show for hurricane victims; Dave Barry (humorist), Mike Peters and Mike Luckovich (cartoonists), who share 4 Pulitzers between them, lectured on politics and humor. Lectures [ edit ] The Studios have always been home to lectures, panel discussions, and scholarly presentations. The organisation hosts symposia and speakers of note each year. For example, it recently hosted American newspaper columnist and former assistant managing editor of The Washington Post Eugene Robinson and Pulitzer Prize for Drama winner Ayad Akhtar . Bob Perlow presented "Tales from Hollywood," which revealed an inside look at shows he's worked on from Laverne Shirley and Cheers to The Tonight Show . Past events in the free lecture series have include leading writing and cultural figures such as Calvin Trillin , Jean Carper , Lee Smith , Lou Harris , former US Poet Laureate Maxine Kumin , poet Billy Collins , and authors James Gleick , Barbara Ehrenreich , Judy Blume , and Meg Cabot. Youth education [ edit ] Central to its community programs are youth education programs and creative experiences designed to last a lifetime, presented in collaboration with other institutional partners such as the Marion Stevens Fund. School at The Studios launched in 2019, a partnership with May Sands Montessori School, with the galleries getting transformed into living classrooms for elementary and middle school students to visit. Also, The Studios is proudly home to the Key West High School 's Drama Club, hosting regular rehearsals as well as their spectacular Spring Musical and Holiday Review. The popular annual Summer Art Camp has different themes each week throughout the summer and plenty of one-on-one attention through small class size and hands-on activities. The Studios' newest youth program is the Youth Arts Fellowship, where each year, a small number of high-achieving high school artists are hand picked for one-on-one mentoring by professional artists to get them ready for college and beyond. Youth Arts Fellows also benefit from free access to Studios' classes and events and other pre-professional support. Glow Hours [ edit ] Hugh’s View sits on the roof of The Studios main building offering panoramic vistas across the rooftops of Old Town, from the Gulf of Mexico on one side to the Atlantic on the other. Comradery, cash bar, and Key West's famous sunsets. Artist studio tours [ edit ] An almost annual event, the studio tours are organized around different locations and an ever-changing variety of Key West artists including wood workers, welders, potters, jewelry makers, painters, and more. History [ edit ] The Studios of Key West proceeds from the traditional approach to the artist colony established by the likes of Yaddo and the MacDowell Colony and expanded more recently by Anderson Ranch, the Vermont Studio Center , and the Atlantic Center for the Arts . Founding executive director Eric Holowacz was installed in early 2007 and was responsible for developing and implementing a strategic plan and building the organisation, programming, partnerships, community engagement ethic, and brand from the ground up. Between 2001 and 2006, initial ideas for The Studios of Key West were developed by civic and arts leaders throughout the community. The Studios of Key West was officially established in 2006 as a 501(c)3 non-profit organization cultural organization, and soon after began building a campus in and around the historic Key West Armory building. Following the initial strategic plan, Holowacz rapidly developed the campus, programming, brand, and external partnerships as a combination of artist studios and residencies and inclusive community and cultural programming. The key founding staff included Sharon McGauley, Elena Devers, and Lauren McAloon. Founding Board members were Peyton Evans, Lynn Kaufelt, John Martini, Ken Domanski and Ann Henderson; and the first home for The Studios of Key West was the historic Armory on White Street, originally built between 1900–1903 as the drill hall and armory for the Florida state militia. Following continued growth over its first decade, The Studios of Key West acquired a new headquarters at 533 Eaton Street, where the non-profit organization has been based since 2015. References [ edit ] ↑ " What We Do ," The Studios of Key West. Retrieved August 26, 2014. ↑ 2014 Catalog, The Studios of Key West. ↑ "Minutes of the Key West Planning Board," March 13, 2014. ↑ " The Studios of Key West (TKSW) ," Artists of Alliance Communities Residency Directory. Retrieved August 26, 2014. v t e Key West History Sinking of the Nuestra Señora de Atocha Key West Street Car Company Great Fire of Key West Isaac Allerton USS Main (1898) 1909 Florida Keys hurricane Overseas Railroad 1919 Florida Keys hurricane 1935 Labor Day hurricane Overseas Highway Cubana de Aviación Flight 493 Conch Republic By topic List of mayors of Key West, Florida List of people from Key West Wrecking in the Florida Keys Areas Fleming Key Sigsbee Park (Dredgers Key) Stock Island (northern part is in the municipality of Key West) Sunset Key Trumbo Point Neighborhoods Key West Historic District Truman Annex Education Monroe County School District Key West HS The College of the Florida Keys Religion Basilica of St. Mary Star of the Sea Landmarks The Armory Audubon House and Tropical Gardens Captain Tony's Saloon Duval Street Mel Fisher Maritime Heritage Museum Fogarty Mansion (Fogarty House) Eduardo H. Gato House Ernest Hemingway House Fred the Tree Key West Aquarium Key West Bight Western Union Key West Butterfly and Nature Conservatory Key West Cemetery Key West Heritage House Museum and Robert Frost Cottage Key West Lighthouse Key West Shipwreck Museum Key West Tropical Forest Botanical Garden Mallory Square Old Post Office and Customshouse Richard Peacon House (Octagon House) Port of Key West Dr. Joseph Y. Porter House Sloppy Joe's Solares Hill Southernmost House The Studios of Key West Thompson Fish House, Turtle Cannery and Kraals Harry S. Truman Little White House U.S. Coast Guard Headquarters, Key West Station Transportation Key West International Airport Culture Conch Republic Fantasy Fest This list is incomplete. Note Naval Air Station Key West is nearby. 24°33′28″N 81°48′9″W ﻿ / ﻿ 24.55778°N 81.80250°W ﻿ / 24.55778; -81.80250 [[Geographic coordinate system|Coordinates]]: {{#parsoid\u0000fragment:14}} span class=\"plainlinks nourlexpansion\">[https://geohack.toolforge.org/geohack.php?pagename=The_Studios_of_Key_West params=24_33_28_N_81_48_9_W_region:US-FL span class=\"geo-default\"> span class=\"geo-dms\" title=\"Maps, aerial photos, and other data for this location\"> span class=\"latitude\">24°33′28″N /span> span class=\"longitude\">81°48′9″W /span> /span> /span> span class=\"geo-multi-punct\"> #xfeff; / #xfeff; /span> span class=\"geo-nondefault\"> span class=\"geo-dec\" title=\"Maps, aerial photos, and other data for this location\">24.55778°N 81.80250°W /span> span style=\"display:none\"> #xfeff; / span class=\"geo\">24.55778; -81.80250 /span> /span> /span>] /span>[[Category:Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas]] /span>"}}'/> Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=The_Studios_of_Key_West oldid=1308741753 " Categories : Arts centers in Florida Buildings and structures in Key West, Florida Art museums and galleries established in 2006 2006 establishments in Florida Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use American English from August 2025 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Coordinates on Wikidata Search Search The Studios of Key West Add languages Add topic